MSC2134: Identity Hash Lookups (#2134)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2134-identity-hash-lookup.md

unless it has already seen that address in plain-text during a previous call of
the /bind mechanism.

Note that in terms of privacy, this proposal does not stop an identity service
from mapping hashed 3pids to users, resulting in a social graph. However, the
identity of the 3pid will at least remain a mystery until /bind is used.

This proposal thus calls for the Identity Service’s /lookup API to use hashed
3pids instead of their plain-text counterparts.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints. Due to the nature of this proposal, the new endpoints should be on a
`v2` path (we also drop the `/api` in order to preserve consistency across
other endpoints):

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`
- `/_matrix/identity/v2/bulk_lookup`

`address` should no longer be in a plain-text format, but will now take a hash
value, and the resulting digest should be encoded in unpadded base64. For
example:

```python
address = "user@example.org"
pepper = "matrix"
digest = hashlib.sha256((pepper + address).encode()).digest()
result_address = unpaddedbase64.encode_base64(digest)
print(result_address)
CpvOgBf0hFzdqZD4ASvWW0DAefErRRX5y8IegMBO98w
```

> SHA-256 has been chosen as it is [currently used

Reviewer: Nowhere in this proposal do we support changing of the algorithm without a specification version change. Like the rest of the Matrix spec, we should put the algorithm into the request/response bodies where appropriate to help consumers of the API negotiate a hash algorithm.

Reviewer 2: This was to save an extra request to the server to ask what the algorithm is, but I suppose we could ask during  `/lookup_pepper`.

Reviewer 2: Should the algorithm be in the form of `sha256` or `m.v1.sha256` like e2ee?

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1190097/59780166-cfb43200-9276-11e9-9f69-b68a7b9e3717.png)

I don't know where you got `m.v1.sha256` from, but it should just be `sha256`.

Reviewer 2: e2ee uses `m.megolm.v1.aes-sha2`.

Reviewer: Encryption algorithms are a very different thing from hashing algorithms. We don't need to mix things here yet, and if we do then `['sha256', 'm.identity.v1.aes-sha256-bcrypt-md5']` isn't the worst thing on the planet.

elsewhere](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.2#adding-hashes-and-signatures-to-outgoing-events)
in the Matrix protocol. Additionally a
[pepper](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pepper_(cryptography)) must be prepended
to the data before hashing in order to serve as a weak defense against existing
rainbow tables. This pepper will be specified by the identity server in order
to prevent a single rainbow table being generated for all identity servers. As
time goes on, this algorithm may be changed provided a spec bump is performed.
Then, clients making a request to `/lookup` must use the hashing algorithm
defined in whichever version of the CS spec they and the IS have agreed to
speaking.

> Identity servers can specify their own peppers, which can be handy if a rainbow table is released for their current one. Identity servers could also set a timer for rotating this value to further impede rainbow table publishing. As such, it must be possible for clients to be able to query what pepper an identity server requires before sending it hashes. Thus a new endpoint must be added:

Reviewer: line wrap please

> Identity servers can specify their own peppers, which can be handy if a rainbow table is released for their current one. Identity servers could also set a timer for rotating this value to further impede rainbow table publishing. As such, it must be possible for clients to be able to query what pepper an identity server requires before sending it hashes. Thus a new endpoint must be added:

Reviewer: We should specify suggestions for how often clients should hit the endpoint, and how often identity servers should naturally rotate the pepper.

Reviewer 2: Ideally it would be rotated quite frequently, but elsewhere in the doc we recommend IS' to cache the hash for faster responses to requests.

Also if we're storing hashes in the DB, we'll need to update those as well... unless we store a hash in the DB, and then request `sha256(30m pepper + sha256(1 day pepper + email))` from clients...

```
GET /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup_pepper
```

This endpoint takes no parameters, and simply returns the current pepper as a JSON object:

```
{
  "pepper": "matrixrocks"
}
```

> In addition, the pepper the client used must be appended as a parameter to the

Reviewer: this sentence implies it is tacked on the end of the route, but in fact it is in the request body. Can we just say "a field in the request body" instead of "appended as a parameter"?

new `/lookup` and `/bulk_lookup` endpoints, ensuring that the client is using
the right one. If it does not match what the server has on file (which may be
the case is it rotated right after the client's request for it), then client
will know to query the pepper again instead of just getting a response saying
no contacts are registered on that identity server.

Thus, a call to `/bulk_lookup` would look like the following:

```
{
  "threepids": [
    [
      "email",
      "user@example.org"
    ],
    [
      "msisdn",
      "123456789"
    ],
    [
      "email",
      "user2@example.org"
    ]
  ],
  "pepper": "matrixrocks"
}
```

If the pepper does not match the server's, the client should receive a `400

> M_INVALID_PARAM` with the error `Provided pepper value does not match

Reviewer: We should not define the error message - this is normally left as an implementation concern and would prevent i18n-aware homeservers from serving relevant non-English errors.

Reviewer 2: Good point, though I would like to specify that the current pepper be included in the error response so that clients do not need to make a request to `/lookup_pepper` after receiving this error.

Reviewer: Typically clients would have their own error handling processes for stuff like this - we don't really need to define it for them. The general expectation of M_INVALID_PARAM so far has been that the client author needs to fix a bug in their code, which implies generic error messages to the user. At most we just need a note about clients being cautious when receiving this error if they try to fix it automatically (also, is it really a bad thing if they call the pepper endpoint again even if the pepper was valid? The worst case is the client makes 3 web requests because of a formatting error in their code).

Reviewer 2: Well it might not just happen because of client error, but because the server's pepper rotated between querying the pepper and sending the hash.

But then again, this is probably a very, very edge case if we define pepper rotation to not be too frequent.

'$server_pepper'`. Clients should ensure they don't enter an infinite loop if
they receive this error more than once even after changing to the correct
pepper.

No parameter changes will be made to /bind, but identity servers should keep a
hashed value for each address it knows about in order to process lookups
quicker. It is the recommendation that this is done during the act of binding.

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the

> implementation, and should return a `M_FORBIDDEN` `errcode` if so.

Reviewer: with 403 error

> 

Reviewer: This proposal does not define a fallback behaviour:
* What if the IS is too old and doesn't support v2?
* When should clients try v1?
* What error conditions on the v2 endpoint cause the use of v1 (if applicable)?

identify and record every 3pid that the user wants to check, whether that
address is already known by the identity server or not.

If the 3pid is hashed, the identity service could not determine the address
unless it has already seen that address in plain-text during a previous call of
the /bind mechanism.

Note that in terms of privacy, this proposal does not stop an identity service
from mapping hashed 3pids to users, resulting in a social graph. However, the
identity of the 3pid will at least remain a mystery until /bind is used.

This proposal thus calls for the Identity Service’s /lookup API to use hashed
3pids instead of their plain-text counterparts.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints. Due to the nature of this proposal, the new endpoints should be on a
`v2` path (we also drop the `/api` in order to preserve consistency across
other endpoints):

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`
- `/_matrix/identity/v2/bulk_lookup`

`address` should no longer be in a plain-text format, but will now take a hash
value, and the resulting digest should be encoded in unpadded base64. For

> example:

Reviewer 3: I think these 'should's ought to be is/are or possibly 'MUST' (ie. it's not optional: it won't work if they're not hashes)

has on file (which may be the case is it rotated right after the client's
request for it), then the client will know to query the hash details again
instead of assuming that no contacts are registered on that identity server.

Thus, a call to `/bulk_lookup` would look like the following:

```
{
  "threepids": [
    [
      "email",
      "vNjEQuRCOmBp/KTuIpZ7RUJgPAbVAyqa0Uzh770tQaw"
    ],
    [
      "msisdn",
      "0VnvYk7YZpe08fP/CGqs3f39QtRjqAA2lPd14eLZXiw"
    ],
    [
      "email",
      "BJaLI0RrLFDMbsk0eEp5BMsYDYzvOzDneQP/9NTemYA"
    ]
  ],
  "pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithm": "sha256"
}
```

If the pepper does not match the server's, the client should receive a `400
M_INVALID_PARAM`.

No parameter changes will be made to /bind, but identity servers should keep a
hashed value for each address it knows about in order to process lookups
quicker. It is the recommendation that this is done during the act of binding.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the
implementation, and should return a HTTP 403 with a `M_FORBIDDEN` `errcode` if

> so.

Reviewer 3: 403 is probably not the right code (403 === you might be able to do this if you authed as someone else). you probably want 400 and probably a dedicated errcode.

Reviewer 2: What about a 404? New identity server implementations shouldn't have to implement an endpoint if they don't want to support the feature.

Reviewer 3: yeah, 404 is also fairly reasonable

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints. Due to the nature of this proposal, the new endpoints should be on a
`v2` path (we also drop the `/api` in order to preserve consistency across
other endpoints):

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`
- `/_matrix/identity/v2/bulk_lookup`

`address` MUST no longer be in a plain-text format, but rather will be a peppered hash
value, and the resulting digest MUST be encoded in unpadded base64.

Identity servers must specify their own hashing algorithms (from a list of
specified values) and peppers, which will be useful if a rainbow table is
released for their current one. Identity servers could also set a timer for
rotating the pepper value to further impede rainbow table publishing (the
recommended period is every 30m, which should be enough for a client to
complete the hashing of all of a user's contacts, but also be nowhere near as
long enough to create a sophisticated rainbow table). As such, it must be
possible for clients to be able to query what pepper an identity server
requires before sending it hashes. A new endpoint must be added:

```

> GET /_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details

Reviewer: is this a v2 endpoint? I think it's v1 as it's the first time we've seen it.

Reviewer 4: The endpoint only makes sense in the context of `/_matrix/identity/api/v2/lookup` so I don't see how putting hash_details at v1 works.

Reviewer 5: > The endpoint only makes sense in the context of /_matrix/identity/api/v2/lookup

endpoints are versioned individually rather than as a set, so I don't think that argument really washes. That said, I have no problem with starting this endpoint at v2 for some sort of consistency with the lookup endpoint.

Reviewer: alright, just wanted to make sure we were aware of the difference - thanks for clarifying.

```

This endpoint takes no parameters, and simply returns the current pepper as a JSON object:

```
{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",

>   "algorithm": "sha256",

Reviewer: This should be an array like so that clients can pick the one they understand:
```suggestion
  "algorithms": ["sha256", "sha512"],
```

A similar `algorithm` field will need to be supplied on the `/lookup` call. Doing this would be in line with the rest of the Matrix protocol.

@mscbot concern Hash algorithm implementation is not future proof.

Reviewer 2: I'm all for being able to specify multiple algorithms the server supports, but the server can just switch from `sha256` to `sha512` once `sha256` has been deemed insecure. We wouldn't want to also send `sha256` at that point, right?

Author: I would support a transition period. Clients are slow to adopt new things, and users are even worse at updating things. We could either force people to scramble to update all the things, or do a softer transition period.

I favour the latter.

Reviewer 2: Right, so have a period where 2+ algos are sent to the client (one new, one old), and we do that for 6 weeks or w/e and then remove the old algo at the end of the advisory period?

Reviewer: We don't define the transition period here and worry about the problem when sha256 is broken.

The idea behind an array and mandatory minimum algorithm is that implementations can standardize on one algorithm and be supported when the spec changes the mandatory algorithm to be something else. Because it's not in the interest of software to break at every version, the server would just start serving `[sha256, sha512]` with a giant warning saying they'll be discontinuing sha256 support in the future.

We could stick a "thou shall not use md5, sha1, sha2, etc" list into the spec, however I'm not about to chase down the hundreds of algorithms out there that we deem insecure.

Reviewer 2: Right, so I need to clarify that there will be a list of approved specs, but always one mandatory one.

Reviewer: tbh there's not much that needs to be clarified at all. By nature of using an array, the line "supported algorithms for the server", and "sha256 is mandatory", you're covered.

}
```

The name `lookup_pepper` was chosen in order to account for pepper values being
returned for other endpoints in the future.

Clients should request this endpoint each time before making a `/lookup` or
`/(bulk_)lookup` request, to handle identity servers which may rotate their
pepper values frequently.

An example of generating a hash using the above hash and pepper is as follows:

```python
address = "user@example.org"
pepper = "matrixrocks"
digest = hashlib.sha256((pepper + address).encode()).digest()
result_address = unpaddedbase64.encode_base64(digest)
print(result_address)
vNjEQuRCOmBp/KTuIpZ7RUJgPAbVAyqa0Uzh770tQaw
```

> SHA-256 should be the first specified hash function. It has been chosen as it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SHA-256 MUST be supported at a minimum. It has been chosen as it
```

request for it), then the server can inform the client that they need to query
the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which
clients would assume to mean that no contacts are registered on that identity
server.

Thus, an example client request to `/bulk_lookup` would look like the
following:

```
{
  "threepids": [
    [
      "email",
      "vNjEQuRCOmBp/KTuIpZ7RUJgPAbVAyqa0Uzh770tQaw"
    ],
    [
      "msisdn",
      "0VnvYk7YZpe08fP/CGqs3f39QtRjqAA2lPd14eLZXiw"
    ],
    [
      "email",
      "BJaLI0RrLFDMbsk0eEp5BMsYDYzvOzDneQP/9NTemYA"
    ]
  ],
  "pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithm": "sha256"
}
```

If the pepper does not match the server's, the server should return a `400
M_INVALID_PARAM`.

No parameter changes will be made to /bind, but identity servers should keep a
hashed value for each address it knows about in order to process lookups
quicker. It is the recommendation that this is done during the act of binding.
Be wary that these hashes will need to be changed whenever the server's pepper
is rotated.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the

> implementation, and should return a HTTP 404 if so.

Reviewer: 404 is the wrong status code and error. It should be a 403 of M_FORBIDDEN.

@mscbot concern v1 endpoints are disabled with the wrong error codes

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r296192979

@dbkr and I talked about this. I thought 404 would make sense so that new Identity Server implementations wouldn't have to set up an endpoint for this just to serve a `403`?

Author: To be honest I can see arguments for a 403 to be explicitly disabled, but as anoa says, that does create *slightly* more work. 404 seems reasonable for me as it clearly explains to the client that the endpoint is not implemented (or used).

Reviewer: The line talks about it being disabled, not missing. If we want to allow servers to outright not serve it (ie: 404), we should remove it from the spec entirely as a breaking change. Alternatively, we stick a 403 as a possible option in the spec to say that the implementation refuses to serve it, rather than it being not implemented.

> If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 404 is received when accessing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 404, 405, or 501 is received when accessing the
```

# MSC2134: Identity Hash Lookups

[Issue #2130](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2130) has been
recently created in response to a security issue brought up by an independent

> party. To summarise the issue, lookups (of matrix user ids) are performed using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
party. To summarise the issue, lookups (of Matrix User IDs) are performed using
```

> non-hashed 3pids (third-party IDs) which means that the identity server can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
non-hashed 3PIDs (third-party IDs) which means that the Identity Server can
```

identify and record every 3pid that the user wants to check, whether that
address is already known by the identity server or not.

> If the 3pid is hashed, the identity service could not determine the address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the 3PID is hashed, the Identity Server could not determine the address
```

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints. Due to the nature of this proposal, the new endpoints should be on a
`v2` path (we also drop the `/api` in order to preserve consistency across
other endpoints):

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`
- `/_matrix/identity/v2/bulk_lookup`

`address` MUST no longer be in a plain-text format, but rather will be a peppered hash
value, and the resulting digest MUST be encoded in unpadded base64.

Identity servers must specify their own hashing algorithms (from a list of
specified values) and peppers, which will be useful if a rainbow table is
released for their current one. Identity servers could also set a timer for
rotating the pepper value to further impede rainbow table publishing (the
recommended period is every 30m, which should be enough for a client to
complete the hashing of all of a user's contacts, but also be nowhere near as
long enough to create a sophisticated rainbow table). As such, it must be
possible for clients to be able to query what pepper an identity server
requires before sending it hashes. A new endpoint must be added:

```
GET /_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details
```

> This endpoint takes no parameters, and simply returns the current pepper as a JSON object:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This endpoint takes no parameters, and simply returns the supported hash algorithms and pepper as a JSON object:
```

```
{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithm": "sha256",
}
```

> The name `lookup_pepper` was chosen in order to account for pepper values being

Reviewer 5: what are the valid values for `lookup_pepper`? can it contain spaces? emoji? control characters?

Reviewer 2: I don't have any expert knowledge on this, so I'd assume prrrooooobably?

To be safe though, it may be best to limit to `[a-zA-Z0-9]` (though that does decrease randomness).

Reviewer 2: But then again, hashing algorithms are designed to take any input and map them to a hash.

Reviewer: can we just say "same character set as unpadded base64"? Means that someone can take values from a random source and encode it, ergo peppering. Algorithms which need more intelligence can also use this to encode values as a backchannel for negotiating the hash.

Reviewer 2: Seeing as the purpose of the pepper is just to change the hash *in some way*, @mvgorcum and I have agreed that `[a-zA-Z0-9]*` is simple and sufficient enough.

returned for other endpoints in the future.

Clients should request this endpoint each time before making a `/lookup` or

> `/(bulk_)lookup` request, to handle identity servers which may rotate their

Author: (for context, your previous line said `/lookup` so you can omit the `()`

pepper values frequently.

An example of generating a hash using the above hash and pepper is as follows:

```python
address = "user@example.org"
pepper = "matrixrocks"
digest = hashlib.sha256((pepper + address).encode()).digest()
result_address = unpaddedbase64.encode_base64(digest)
print(result_address)
vNjEQuRCOmBp/KTuIpZ7RUJgPAbVAyqa0Uzh770tQaw
```

> SHA-256 MUST be supported at a minimum. It has been chosen as it is [currently

Reviewer 5: supported by whom? Servers? Clients?

if it's a minimum, what other algorithms are specced? are people allowed to invent their own? what is the namespacing? who picks what is actually used?

I think it's much easier just to say "the only valid algorithm is sha256" for now.

Reviewer 2: The way I envision it, the spec determines the names for algos and what they actually mean. The servers then advertise what they support from a list that the spec provides, and clients can pick one that they provide. The currently only defined one atm is `sha256`, which is the SHA-256 hashing algorithm defined in [RFC 4634](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634).

I can try and make this clearer in the doc however.

used
elsewhere](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.2#adding-hashes-and-signatures-to-outgoing-events)
in the Matrix protocol, and is reasonably secure as of 2019.

When performing a lookup, the pepper and hashing algorithm the client used must
be part of the request body. If they do not match what the server has on file
(which may be the case if the pepper was rotated right after the client's
request for it), then the server can inform the client that they need to query
the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which
clients would assume to mean that no contacts are registered on that identity
server.

Thus, an example client request to `/bulk_lookup` would look like the
following:

```
{
  "threepids": [
    [
      "email",
      "vNjEQuRCOmBp/KTuIpZ7RUJgPAbVAyqa0Uzh770tQaw"
    ],
    [
      "msisdn",
      "0VnvYk7YZpe08fP/CGqs3f39QtRjqAA2lPd14eLZXiw"
    ],
    [
      "email",
      "BJaLI0RrLFDMbsk0eEp5BMsYDYzvOzDneQP/9NTemYA"
    ]
  ],

>   "pepper": "matrixrocks",

Reviewer 5: should this be `lookup_pepper` for consistency?

Reviewer 2: It's implied as you're using this on the `/lookup` API, but would indeed help reduce confusion.

  "algorithm": "sha256"
}
```

If the pepper does not match the server's, the server should return a `400

> M_INVALID_PARAM`.

Reviewer 5: so the client should resubmit the the request whenever it gets an `M_INVALID_PARAM` ? that sounds a bit wrong.

Reviewer 2: After querying `hash_details` again, yes.

Reviewer: having re-read, I think a new error code is better here. `M_INVALID_PEPPER` might be best.

Reviewer 4: Should we define an error code for wrong hash function separately, eg `M_INVALID_HASH`?

Reviewer: Wrong hash algorithm is a client bug, so `M_INVALID_PARAM` would still work. An invalid pepper is most likely the cause of the IS under this proposal, therefore it makes a bit more sense to give it its own error code imo. There's still the opportunity for the client to use the wrong pepper, however given it has to supply the pepper it used, the chances of this are much less likely.

Reviewer 2: New error code acquired.

No parameter changes will be made to /bind, but identity servers should keep a
hashed value for each address it knows about in order to process lookups
quicker. It is the recommendation that this is done during the act of binding.
Be wary that these hashes will need to be changed whenever the server's pepper

> is rotated.

Reviewer 5: ... which sounds like a showstopper for calculating the hashes at bind time?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r296744772 does too.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph can be truncated as "No parameter changes will be made to /bind."

The rest is an implementation suggestion which isn't feasible. Implementations can be smart and optimize for this regardless of the spec's recommendation here.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the
implementation, and should return a HTTP 404 if so.

> If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 404, 405 or 501 is received when

Reviewer 5: what's the rationale behind requiring this for 405 and 501? I'm struggling to imagine why an old server would return these codes.

Reviewer 2: @turt2live

Reviewer: Consistency with the other fallbacks in the spec, namely the v2 invite from s2s.

Reviewer 5: https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/unstable#put-matrix-federation-v2-invite-roomid-eventid says "400 or 404".

[501](https://httpstatuses.com/501) means "I don't understand POST at all" ), which is different to "I don't support POST at this endpoint".

[405](https://httpstatuses.com/405) means "I support this endpoint for other methods (eg GET), but you can't POST to it".

Neither seems relevant here.

accessing the `v2` endpoint, they should fallback to the `v1` endpoint instead.

> However, clients should be aware that plain-text 3pids are required, and MUST

Reviewer 5: I think this is a SHOULD situation

Reviewer 2: This was just switched to a MUST on @Half-Shot's suggestion.

I feel like it's a good thing for clients to do this? But maybe this isn't something the spec should dictate...

Author: Okay, I think it is fair to call a client non-complaint if it doesn't warn users that its about to transmit information in a potentially insecure manner. It isn't really a huge burden on the client to inform users of this either, so I'd like to hear a good reason for allowing people to opt out?

Author: Okay, I think it is fair to call a client non-complaint if it doesn't warn users that its about to transmit information in a potentially insecure manner. It isn't really a huge burden on the client to inform users of this either, so I'd like to hear a good reason for allowing people to opt out?

> clients should be aware that plain-text 3pids are required, and should ask for

Reviewer 2: Great point.

ask for user consent to send 3pids in plain-text, and be clear about where they
are being sent to.

## Tradeoffs

* This approach means that the client now needs to calculate a hash by itself,
  but the belief is that most languages provide a mechanism for doing so.
* There is a small cost incurred by performing hashes before requests, but this
  is outweighed by the privacy implications of sending plain-text addresses.

## Potential issues

This proposal does not force an identity server to stop handling plain-text
requests, because a large amount of the Matrix ecosystem relies upon this
behavior. However, a conscious effort should be made by all users to use the
privacy respecting endpoints outlined above. Identity servers may disallow use
of the v1 endpoint.

> Unpadded base64 has been chosen to encode the value due to its ubiquitous

Reviewer 5: it only has support in many languages because we've written it. Consistency with the rest of the API is a better reason to choose it.

support in many languages, however it does mean that special characters in the

> address will have to be encoded when used as a parameter value.

Reviewer 5: errrm.... there are no special characters to encode in base64?

Reviewer 2: I think @Half-Shot was referring to `/`.

Reviewer 6: so surely we should use url-safe base64 then?

Reviewer: This is a non-issue given the hashes appear in the request body. Would advocate for taking out the special characters sentence entirely.

Author: [They appear as query parameters for lookup](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#get-matrix-identity-api-v1-lookup)

Reviewer: oh. In that case, we should use URL safe unpadded base64 to avoid the vast majority of the concerns in [MSC1884](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1884) (see the paragraphs explaining how software failing 50% of the time is bad)

## Other considered solutions

Ideally identity servers would never receive plain-text addresses, however it
is necessary for the identity server to send email/sms messages during a
bind, as it cannot trust a homeserver to do so as the homeserver may be lying.
Additionally, only storing 3PID hashes at rest instead of the plain-text
versions is impractical if the hashing algorithm ever needs to be changed.

Bloom filters are an alternative method of providing private contact discovery,
however does not scale well due to clients needing to download a large filter
that needs updating every time a new bind is made. Further considered solutions

> are explored in https://signal.org/blog/contact-discovery/ Signal's eventual

Reviewer 5: this sentence no sense makes

Reviewer: it still makes no sense - reopened. You have the URL twice, and once in the middle of the sentence.

Reviewer 2: It's two different URLs guys.

solution of using SGX is considered impractical for a Matrix-style setup.

While a bit out of scope for this MSC, there has been debate over preventing
3PIDs as being kept as plain-text on disk. The argument against this was that
if the hashing algorithm (in this case SHA-256) was broken, we couldn't update

> the hashing algorithm without having the plaintext 3PIDs. Well @toml helpfully

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the hashing algorithm without having the plaintext 3PIDs. Well @lampholder helpfully
```

> added that we could just take the old hashes and rehash them in the more secure

Reviewer 7: FWIW its not immediately clear that rehashing a broken hash makes it more secure.

Reviewer 2: My assumption is that it is. Are you saying that:

```
SuperGreatHash(BrokenAlgo(secret))
```

could be less secure than:

```
SuperGreatHash(secret)
```

because of a property of combining two hashes?

In either case, I'll add a note that this requires further discussion outside of this MSC.

Reviewer 7: Ja, since e.g. if `BrokenAlgo(a) == BrokenAlgo(b)` then `SuperGreatHash(BrokenAlgo(a)) == SuperGreatHash(BrokenAlgo(b))`.

Reviewer 2: Good point.

Reviewer 2: Does this break any security this may have, or only if you've found a collision in the old algo?

Reviewer 7: I wouldn't put any faith in this adding security without formal verification

hashing algorithm, thus transforming the hash from SHA-256 to

> SHA-256+SomeBetterAlg. This may spur on an MSC in the future that supports

Reviewer 5: this doesn't allow us to rotate the pepper though?

Reviewer 2: This was discussed in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r296123595

TL;DR:

Servers can hash the 3pids on disk with some static pepper (time when server was first started perhaps) and then hash that value with a rotating pepper, both of which would be reported through `/hash_details`.

Clients would then query with a result from the following:

```
somehashalgo(pepper_rotated + somehashalgo(pepper_stored + 3pid))
```

Reviewer 2: This may be trumped by https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r296744772

bind, as it cannot trust a homeserver to do so as the homeserver may be lying.
Additionally, only storing 3pid hashes at rest instead of the plain-text
versions is impractical if the hashing algorithm ever needs to be changed.

Bloom filters are an alternative method of providing private contact discovery,
however does not scale well due to clients needing to download a large filter
that needs updating every time a new bind is made. Further considered solutions
are explored in https://signal.org/blog/contact-discovery/ Signal's eventual
solution of using SGX is considered impractical for a Matrix-style setup.

While a bit out of scope for this MSC, there has been debate over preventing
3pids as being kept as plain-text on disk. The argument against this was that
if the hashing algorithm (in this case SHA-256) was broken, we couldn't update
the hashing algorithm without having the plaintext 3PIDs. Well @toml helpfully
added that we could just take the old hashes and rehash them in the more secure
hashing algorithm, thus transforming the hash from SHA-256 to
SHA-256+SomeBetterAlg. This may spur on an MSC in the future that supports

> this, unless it is just an implementation detail.

Reviewer 4: The proposed pepper rotation means that the identity server can't only store the hashed 3pids, as it needs to calculate the new hashes using the plaintext 3pid. This could be solved by adding another round of hashing for every pepper rotation. Of course that has as downside that the amount of hashes grows with the amount of pepper rotations, monotonically increasing the computational costs over time. 
ie. `betteralg(pepper4+sha256(pepper3+sha256(pepper2+sha256(pepper1+3pid))))`
While this has the advantage of allowing the identity server to discard plaintext 3pids, the increased computational time is not worth the tradeoff in my opinion.

Reviewer 2: Very good point. You could still rotate the lookup pepper but keep the hashes stored in the db as vanilla sha256. Then the lookup alg would become `pepperN+sha256(sha256(3pid))`.

Reviewer 4: Good point, that may be worth doing. It does increase the implementation complexity a bit but has the upside of allowing the server to only store hashes. It doesn't solve rainbow table attacks or weak hashing algorithms on the database stored hashes.

Reviewer 2: > (As a small nitpick, wouldn't it be betterhashalg(pepperN+sha256(3pid))? Of course the stored hashes can also include a static pepper.)

Well the 3pids would be hashed on disk as `pepper_stored+sha256(3pid)`, so when you lookup you'd send a result from `pepperN+sha256(pepper_stored+sha256(3pid))`, no?

Reviewer 2: I see what you mean now. Yes it's much clearer written like:

```
somehashalgo(pepper_rotated+somehashalgo(pepper_stored+3pid))
```

non-hashed 3PIDs (third-party IDs) which means that the identity server can
identify and record every 3PID that the user wants to check, whether that
address is already known by the identity server or not.

If the 3PID is hashed, the identity server could not determine the address
unless it has already seen that address in plain-text during a previous call of
the /bind mechanism.

Note that in terms of privacy, this proposal does not stop an identity server
from mapping hashed 3PIDs to users, resulting in a social graph. However, the
identity of the 3PID will at least remain a mystery until /bind is used.

This proposal thus calls for the Identity Service’s /lookup API to use hashed
3PIDs instead of their plain-text counterparts.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints. Due to the nature of this proposal, the new endpoints should be on a
`v2` path (we also drop the `/api` in order to preserve consistency across
other endpoints):

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`
- `/_matrix/identity/v2/bulk_lookup`

`address` MUST no longer be in a plain-text format, but rather will be a peppered hash

> value encoded in unpadded base64.

Reviewer: see https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r296698929

```suggestion
value encoded in URL-safe unpadded base64 (similar to [room version 4's event IDs](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v4#event-ids)).
```

# MSC2134: Identity Hash Lookups

[Issue #2130](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2130) has been
recently created in response to a security issue brought up by an independent
party. To summarise the issue, lookups (of Matrix user IDs) are performed using
non-hashed 3PIDs (third-party IDs) which means that the identity server can
identify and record every 3PID that the user wants to check, whether that
address is already known by the identity server or not.

If the 3PID is hashed, the identity server could not determine the address
unless it has already seen that address in plain-text during a previous call of
the /bind mechanism.

> Note that in terms of privacy, this proposal does not stop an identity service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that in terms of privacy, this proposal does not stop an identity server
```

from mapping hashed 3PIDs to users, resulting in a social graph. However, the
identity of the 3PID will at least remain a mystery until /bind is used.

This proposal thus calls for the Identity Service’s /lookup API to use hashed
3PIDs instead of their plain-text counterparts.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints. Due to the nature of this proposal, the new endpoints should be on a

> `v2` path (we also drop the `/api` in order to preserve consistency across

Reviewer 6: I am still confused on why we're using /v2 as a prefix. Surely we should be using the release numbering system these days? (r0.1.0 or whatever)?

Reviewer: only the client-server API uses the `r0` versioning scheme for endpoints. As mentioned elsewhere (can't find thread), back in August or so we came to the conclusion that the spec version in the endpoint is a bad option because we'd have to ratchet the whole thing up on every major release. Instead, we version individual endpoints with `v1`, `v2`, etc while maintaining an `rX.Y.Z` for the spec itself.

Reviewer 2: Check out @turt2live's explanation here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r294149416

other endpoints):

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`
- `/_matrix/identity/v2/bulk_lookup`

`address` MUST no longer be in a plain-text format, but rather will be a peppered hash
value, and the resulting digest MUST be encoded in unpadded base64.

Identity servers must specify their own hashing algorithms (from a list of

> specified values) and peppers, which will be useful if a rainbow table is

Reviewer: the "from a list of specified values" isn't adding value here, but is adding confusion. Specified from where? by who? when? how? what are they? why does it need to be a list?

> specified values) and peppers, which will be useful if a rainbow table is

Reviewer: also this is plural peppers, when the rest of the doc mentions singular

released for their current one. Identity servers could also set a timer for
rotating the pepper value to further impede rainbow table publishing (the

> recommended period is every 30m, which should be enough for a client to

Reviewer: Avoid ambiguity between minutes and months whenever possible:
```suggestion
recommended period is every 30 minutes, which should be enough for a client to
```

complete the hashing of all of a user's contacts, but also be nowhere near as

> long enough to create a sophisticated rainbow table). As such, it must be

Reviewer 6: Hm, are you sure about that?  According to https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/50618/how-fast-can-a-sha-256-implementation-go a Ryzen can hash at 2.1 GB/s (back in 2017).   Even if you assume that every 12 digit number is a valid international phone number, then that's roughly (12*1e12 bytes)/(2.1GB/s) to calculate a rainbow table, which works out at 1.5 hours (possibly 8 hours if each entry is rounded up to a 64 byte block).  If you split that over a few CPUs, then it can easily fit inside 30 minutes.

I'm also unclear what attack we're protecting from here.  If it's an attacker intercepting the uploaded phonebook, then they'll be doing an offline attack anyway - the 30 mins seems irrelevant?  So they can then calculate the rainbow table at their leisure and find out what the numbers are...

That said, I agree it's marginally better than using a static salt, although it makes me a bit sad that the identity server will burning CPU rehashing all its 3PIDs every N minutes.

It also seems to design out the ability to store 3PIDs hashed on disk, if the pepper keeps changing?

Reviewer 4: I also don't fully see where the 30 minute rotation comes from. The identity server probably has a very large set of 3pids, so hashing all of them every 30 minutes seems costly (alternatively we could hash-on demand with an ever-changing pepper, but that would burn loads of cycles every time someone does a 3pid lookup).

As discussed before: phone numbers are probably a lost cause for this MSC. Peppered hashing probably helps a bit against causally grabbing all 3pid phone number mappings, but it won't help against a more determined attacker. E-mail addresses stand a bit of a better chance against brute force attacks, but with the amount of gmail addresses out there getting large swaths of data is probably still feasible.

Even if a 30 minute rotation would help against brute force hashing, it is no more than a little inconvenient, you'd have to create hashes for 29 minutes, send them off, get the mappings back and then hash the next batch for the new pepper.

Reviewer 2: The 30m period was chosen as it ensured frequent rotation, but it does seem as if the cons outweigh any supposed benefits.

Perhaps we don't define any requirement for pepper rotation and just leave it up to implementation.

> possible for clients to be able to query what pepper an identity server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible for clients to be able to query what pepper the identity server
```

requires before sending it hashes. A new endpoint must be added:

```
GET /_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details
```

This endpoint takes no parameters, and simply returns supported hash algorithms
and peppers as a JSON object:

```
{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithms": ["sha256"],
}
```

The name `lookup_pepper` was chosen in order to account for pepper values being
returned for other endpoints in the future.

Clients should request this endpoint each time before making a `/lookup` or
`/bulk_lookup` request, to handle identity servers which may rotate their
pepper values frequently. Clients must choose one of the given hash algorithms

> to encrypt the 3pid during lookup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to encrypt the 3PID during lookup.
```

An example of generating a hash using SHA-256 and the provided pepper is as
follows:

```python
address = "user@example.org"
pepper = "matrixrocks"

> digest = hashlib.sha256((pepper + address).encode()).digest()

Reviewer 8: Typically, the hash is done on `address + pepper` rather than `pepper + address`, because hashes usually operate on the input from beginning to end, so if you do `hash(pepper + address)`, then an attacker can, for any given pepper, pre-calculate the hash state of for the pepper, and then update it for every address that they want to check.

Reviewer 2: Interesting, thanks!

result_address = unpaddedbase64.encode_base64(digest)
print(result_address)
vNjEQuRCOmBp/KTuIpZ7RUJgPAbVAyqa0Uzh770tQaw
```

Possible hashing algorithms will be defined in the Matrix specification, and an
Identity Server can choose to implement one or all of them. Later versions of
the specification may deprecate algorithms when necessary. Currently the only
listed hashing algorithm is SHA-256 as defined by [RFC
4634](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634) and Identity Servers and clients

> MUST agree to its use with the string `sha256`.

Reviewer: Can we just replace this whole paragraph with:

The Matrix specification standardizes on a set of hashing algorithms for identity servers to use. Implementations are welcome to use additional algorithms, however SHA-256 is mandatory as an option.

> MUST agree to its use with the string `sha256`.

Reviewer 6: We should explain why we're deliberately using a fast hash rather than lots of rounds of bcrypt or something similarly slow.

When performing a lookup, the pepper and hashing algorithm the client used must
be part of the request body. If they do not match what the server has on file
(which may be the case if the pepper was rotated right after the client's

> request for it), then the server can inform the client that they need to query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
request for it), then the server must inform the client that they need to query
```

> the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which

Reviewer 2: Mm, this [was the case earlier](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r295355351) but the pepper/hash were included in the error message, which was thought to be bad practice.

Maybe if we just include them as separate fields instead.

> the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which

Reviewer 2: Hm, spec [seems to say](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/unstable#api-standards) extra fields in error responses are a no-no.

> the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which

Reviewer 8: The spec says that extra fields are OK
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1012976/60149033-4e422f80-97a1-11e9-8695-5e1d7bd5fab4.png)

> the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which

Reviewer 2: Ah right!

server.

Thus, an example client request to `/bulk_lookup` would look like the
following:

```
{
  "threepids": [
    [
      "email",
      "vNjEQuRCOmBp/KTuIpZ7RUJgPAbVAyqa0Uzh770tQaw"
    ],
    [
      "msisdn",
      "0VnvYk7YZpe08fP/CGqs3f39QtRjqAA2lPd14eLZXiw"
    ],
    [
      "email",
      "BJaLI0RrLFDMbsk0eEp5BMsYDYzvOzDneQP/9NTemYA"
    ]
  ],
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithm": "sha256"
}
```

If the pepper does not match the server's, the server should return a `400
M_INVALID_PARAM`.

No parameter changes will be made to /bind, but identity servers should keep a
hashed value for each address it knows about in order to process lookups
quicker. It is the recommendation that this is done during the act of binding.
Be wary that these hashes will need to be changed whenever the server's pepper
is rotated.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the
implementation, and should return a HTTP 404 if so.

If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 404, 405 or 501 is received when
accessing the `v2` endpoint, they should fallback to the `v1` endpoint instead.

> However, clients should be aware that plain-text 3PIDs are required, and MUST

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, clients should be aware that plain-text 3PIDs are required, and SHOULD
```

Here's my rationale: Not every server is in a legal position of needing to acquire explicit consent. The consent may be gathered external to the server, and we don't have enforcement for the MUST here anyways. By making this a SHOULD (with optional strong recommendation) we don't have to open this MSC up to consent enforcement and still permit Matrix to be used in the most environments possible.

It would be a client's (and maybe custom identity server) responsibility to implement a privacy-enhancing feature like requiring consent. There are valid use cases for not gathering consent, although I do agree the spec's recommendation should be to require consent, but not mandate it.

@mscbot concern Unenforcable consent requirement

Author: This is my position to. There is no sensible way we can enforce this but when we come to spec this, **please strongly reccomend** aquiring consent lest we end up in another privacy-sized hole.

ask for user consent to send 3PIDs in plain-text, and be clear about where they
are being sent to.

## Tradeoffs

* This approach means that the client now needs to calculate a hash by itself,
  but the belief is that most languages provide a mechanism for doing so.
* There is a small cost incurred by performing hashes before requests, but this
  is outweighed by the privacy implications of sending plain-text addresses.

## Potential issues

This proposal does not force an identity server to stop handling plain-text
requests, because a large amount of the Matrix ecosystem relies upon this
behavior. However, a conscious effort should be made by all users to use the
privacy respecting endpoints outlined above. Identity servers may disallow use

> of the v1 endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the v1 endpoint, as per above.
```

just to be clear on how this is done, as by the time a reader gets to this point they may have forgotten

that needs updating every time a new bind is made. Further considered solutions
are explored in https://signal.org/blog/contact-discovery/ Signal's eventual
solution of using Software Guard Extensions (detailed in
https://signal.org/blog/private-contact-discovery/) is considered impractical
for a federated network, as it requires specialized hardware.

While a bit out of scope for this MSC, there has been debate over preventing
3PIDs as being kept as plain-text on disk. The argument against this was that
if the hashing algorithm (in this case SHA-256) was broken, we couldn't update
the hashing algorithm without having the plaintext 3PIDs. @lampholder helpfully
added that we could just take the old hashes and rehash them in the more secure
hashing algorithm, thus transforming the hash from SHA-256 to
SHA-256+SomeBetterAlg. However @erikjohnston then pointed out that if
`BrokenAlgo(a) == BrokenAlgo(b)` then `SuperGreatHash(BrokenAlgo(a)) ==
SuperGreatHash(BrokenAlgo(b))`, so all you'd need to do is find a match in the
broken algo, and you'd break the new algorithm as well. This means that you
would need the plaintext 3PIDs to encode a new hash, and thus storing them

> hashed on disk is not possible.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure i'd say that storing hashed on disk is impossible due to this; it just means that if the hash changes, everyone has to re-bind their threepids, which could be done over the course of a given time window. Something like: "Recent research suggests that SHA256 will soon be breakable using commodity hardware; therefore we're migrating to SHA512.  Over the next 6 months you will need to re-verify your 3PIDs if you want to be discoverable after the migration is complete"

clients are going to be hashing thousands of contacts.

When performing a lookup, the pepper and hashing algorithm the client used must
be part of the request body. If they do not match what the server has on file
(which may be the case if the pepper was rotated right after the client's
request for it), then the server must inform the client that they need to query
the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which
clients would assume to mean that no contacts are registered on that identity
server.

Thus, an example client request to `/bulk_lookup` would look like the
following:

```
{
  "threepids": [
    [
      "email",
      "vNjEQuRCOmBp/KTuIpZ7RUJgPAbVAyqa0Uzh770tQaw"
    ],
    [
      "msisdn",
      "0VnvYk7YZpe08fP/CGqs3f39QtRjqAA2lPd14eLZXiw"
    ],
    [
      "email",
      "BJaLI0RrLFDMbsk0eEp5BMsYDYzvOzDneQP/9NTemYA"
    ]
  ],
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithm": "sha256"
}
```

If the pepper does not match the server's, the server should return a `400
M_INVALID_PARAM`.

No parameter changes will be made to /bind.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the

> implementation, and should return a HTTP 403 if so.

Reviewer: it's important to say it's a Matrix error:
```suggestion
implementation, and should return a 403 `M_FORBIDDEN` error if so.
```

# MSC2134: Identity Hash Lookups

[Issue #2130](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2130) has been
recently created in response to a security issue brought up by an independent
party. To summarise the issue, lookups (of Matrix user IDs) are performed using
non-hashed 3PIDs (third-party IDs) which means that the identity server can
identify and record every 3PID that the user wants to check, whether that
address is already known by the identity server or not.

If the 3PID is hashed, the identity server could not determine the address
unless it has already seen that address in plain-text during a previous call of
the /bind mechanism.

Note that in terms of privacy, this proposal does not stop an identity server
from mapping hashed 3PIDs to users, resulting in a social graph. However, the
identity of the 3PID will at least remain a mystery until /bind is used.

This proposal thus calls for the Identity Service’s /lookup API to use hashed
3PIDs instead of their plain-text counterparts.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 2: Hello all. So we've decided @uhoreg's scheme is pretty good and I've written up a piece for the MSC involving it. Before we decide on it however, @erikjohnston has pointed out that we should be careful to ensure that this isn't a lot more work without much gain. In the interest of that, here are the two possible resulting writeups, with a summary at the end of what privacy each buys us.

## The @uhoreg solution

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints. Instead of `/lookup` and `/bulk_lookup` endpoints, this proposal
replaces them with endpoints `/lookup` and `/lookup_hashes`. Additionally, the
endpoints should be on a `v2` path, to avoid confusion with origin `/lookup`
functionality. We also drop the `/api` in order to preserve consistency across
other endpoints:

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`
- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup_hashes`

The following back-and-forth now occurs between the client and server.

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

    alice@gmail.com
    bob@startmail.com
    carl@matrix.org
    +1 234 567 8910

The client will hash each 3PID (hashing details are described below) as a
concatenation of the medium and address, separated by a space. Then send the
first `N` characters of each in an array, deduplicating any matching entries.
(Where `N` is a low value, chosen by the client, and a trade-off of metadata the
server learns versus the client). Note that phone numbers should be formatted
as defined by https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pstn-phone-numbers,
before being hashed).

    In preparing the values, a client should convert an email from
    "abcde@matrix.org" to "email abcde@matrix.org".

    NOTE: Example numbers, not real hash values.

    "email alice@gmail.com"   -> 70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4
    "email bob@startmail.com" -> 21375456a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff
    "email carl@matrix.org"   -> 758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f
    "msisdn 12345678910"      -> 21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351

    Note that bob@startmail.com and 12345678910 have the same leading characters
    in their hashed representations.

    If N = 5, the client sends the following:

    POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

    {
      "hashes": [
        "70b1b",
        "21375",
        "758af"
      ]
    }

The identity server, upon receiving these partial hashes, will then check which
hashes it knows of that match the given leading values. It will then return the
next `M` characters of each that match (where `M` is also a low value, with a
trade-off being higher may let the client find hashes of 3PIDs it doesn't know,
and lower meaning the client may send hashes of 3PIDs that do not map to a
Matrix user):

    The identity server found the following hashes that contain the leading
    characters:

    70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4
    70b1b1b28dcfcc179a54983f46e1753c3fcdb0884d06fad741582c0180b56fc9
    21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351

    And if `M` = 7, the identity server will then send back the following
    payload:

    {
      "70b1b": ["5637937", "1b28dcf"],
      "21375": ["b3f1b61"]
    }

The client can then deduce which hashes actually lead to Matrix IDs. In this
case, 70b1b5637937 are the leading characters of "alice@gmail.com",
21375b3f1b61 are the leading characters of "12345678910" and 70b1b1b28dcf does
not match any of the hashes the client has locally, so it is ignored.
"bob@startmail.com" and "carl@matrix.org" do not seem to have Matrix IDs
associated with them.

Finally, the client sends the full hashes that it believes are associated with
Matrix IDs to the identity server on the `/lookup_hashes` endpoint:

    POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup_hashes

    {
      "hashes": {
        "1": "70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4",
        "2": "21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351"
      }
    }

The server will find the MXIDs that match these hashes, and return them:

    {
      "mappings": {
        "1": "@alice:example.org",
        "2": "@fred:matrix.org"
      }
    }

The client can now display which 3PIDs link to which Matrix IDs.

The hash value must be peppered in order to reduce the attacks the identity
server can perform (namely sending a rainbow table of hashes back in the
response to `/lookup`). The resulting digest MUST be encoded in URL-safe
unpadded base64 (similar to [room version 4's event
IDs](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v4#event-ids)).

---

Past what they already knew, from this exchange the client and server have learned:

Client:

* Partial 3PID hash "70b1b1b28dcf" of some matrix user (likely useless)
* alice@gmail.com -> @alice:example.org (required)
* +1 234 567 8910 -> @fred:matrix.org (required)

Server:

* Partial hash "758af" (likely useless)

---

@erikjohnston brought up a potential attack vector by the identity server in which it could send many, many results from a rainbow table to the client in order to try and match the hashes it has locally.

However, this can be mitigated by adding a salt to the hash that the client specifies, which we may want to add to both options quite simply anyways.

## The hashing-is-good-enough solution

We just pepper hashes that get sent to the identity server, and the IS responds with the MXIDs:

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

    alice@gmail.com
    bob@startmail.com
    carl@matrix.org
    +1 234 567 8910

The client will hash each 3PID (hashing details are described below) as a
concatenation of the medium and address, separated by a space. Then send
each hash to the server as part of a dictionary.

    In preparing the values, a client should convert an email from
    "abcde@matrix.org" to "email abcde@matrix.org".

    NOTE: Example numbers, not real hash values.

    "email alice@gmail.com"   -> 70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4
    "email bob@startmail.com" -> 21375456a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff
    "email carl@matrix.org"   -> 758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f
    "msisdn 12345678910"      -> 21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351

    POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

    {
      "hashes": {
        "1": "70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4", 
        "2": "21375456a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff", 
        "3": "758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f", 
        "4": "21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351"
      }
    }

The identity server will then respond with the Matrix IDs corresponding to the 3PIDs it is aware of:

    {
      "mappings":
        "1": "@alice:example.org",
        "4": "@fred:matrix.org"
      }
    }

---

Past what they already knew, from this exchange the client and server have learned:

Client:

* alice@gmail.com -> @alice:example.org (required)
* +1 234 567 8910 -> @fred:matrix.org (required)

Server:

* Full hash "70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4" (required)
* Full hash "21375456a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff" (full hash, potentially reversible)
* Full hash "758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f" (full hash, potentially reversible)
* Full hash "21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351" (required)

Reviewer 2: >I'm not sure if this is the attack erik was talking about, but what I was saying on matrix was that if we're assuming that the server can build a database of most possible emails/msisdns, I don't see what prevents the server from returning all the matching hashes anyway.

>I also don't understand what your salt workaround to erik's attack is and where it's incorporated.

I wrote this all up then discussed with Erik, which is why it's a little note at the end rather than in the example. I wasn't entirely sure if we considered it part of our threat model but it seems like we do.

Essentially responding with many possible hashes requires you to build a rainbow table on the server. If we have the client specify a random salt before sending its hashes, then the server will need to rebuild its rainbow table, which should raise the implementation requirements to "impractical enough for most people to consider it".

Reviewer 3: Fair enough. Basically I'm just not sure option 1 buys you anything over option 2.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, it in fact leaks more data if the IS is able to pull off the above-mentioned attack.

Reviewer 2: @mvgorcum comments that we could have the client salt the hashes only on the call to `/lookup_hashes`. That way the IS doesn't need to re-hash its entire db, only the potentially matching 3PIDs sent in the first call, which is potentially much less resource intensive.

So the two calls would have to be tied together with a session token so that the IS knew which 3PIDs to rehash, and an extra "salt" key would have to be added to the `/lookup_hashes` call, but that'd be all.

Here's a rough run-through of the new method:

Client has their plainly hashed (no salt) 3PIDs (IS has cached their own):

* 70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4
* 21375456a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff
* 758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f
* 21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351

Client sends:

```
POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

{
  "hashes": [
    "70b1b",
    "21375",
    "758af"
  ]
}
```

Server responds:

```
{
  "hashes": {
    "70b1b": ["5637937", "1b28dcf"],
    "21375": ["b3f1b61"]
  },
  "session": "xj2847s"
}
```

Client then filters its local list by what the server says it has, then the client salts and hashes the filtered list and sends the resulting salted hashes to the server, along with the session ID:

```
{
  "hashes": {
    "1": "cbe78f80820c674a2b3399fabdb0e911be07b5f803dade13720efa45dd4f4bc6",
    "2": "51640dec4b9956d857eb4077c72d9d90b27a238780d31a3e9235dcea0df6d8ec"
  },
  "salt": "bla",
  "session": "xj2847s"
}
```

The server then rehashes the previous matching list (substantially less than the whole DB) with the client's salt, and sends back the matching Matrix IDs:

```
{
  "mappings":
    "1": "@alice:example.org",
    "4": "@fred:matrix.org"
  }
}
```

With this setup, the identity server could still harvest client hashes if it built a suitable rainbow table, but it would need to build a new rainbow table per lookup (and new salt) to be able to actually extract 3PIDs from them, which makes the resource requirements of untargetted 3PID harvesting skyrocket.

Reviewer 4: 2 things:

first:
Maybe it's not required for the server response to send the partial hashes back. It does help the client to determine whether or not it should send the salted hashes back, since it can determine if itself has a potential match with the added information.

second:
We should probably set an individual salt for each sent hash, this doesn't increase the computation time for either the client or the server, but does increase the costs of brute-forcing.

The client would then respond with:

```
{
  "hashes": {
    "1": "cbe78f80820c674a2b3399fabdb0e911be07b5f803dade13720efa45dd4f4bc6",
    "2": "51640dec4b9956d857eb4077c72d9d90b27a238780d31a3e9235dcea0df6d8ec"
  },
  "salts": {
  "1": "bla1",
  "2": "bla2"
  }, 
  "session": "xj2847s"
}
```

Reviewer 2: Second point is great, but not sure what you mean by the first? You want the server to send back complete hashes?

Reviewer 2: Found out [on matrix](https://matrix.to/#/!LlraCeVuFgMaxvRySN:amorgan.xyz/$1Vr59drCZqOwq6lm4o0BaKEyiTIWro6gV6rXpnymOKY?via=amorgan.xyz&via=matrix.vgorcum.com&via=half-shot.uk). Essentially he meant that the server could just send back which hashes match, instead of having to prove each matched by sending the next bit of the hash.

However, this would actually cause more computation for the client since no hashes would be eliminated (since the server can say a match happened, and here's the next bit of the hash. If that next bit didn't match, the client can disregard it as not a match). As well as it being much easier for the server to carry out a "send me all your hashes" attack, without having to build a rainbow table.

So I think we're going to scrap point #1.

Reviewer 8: Rather than using sessions, you could just re-send the original partial hashes.  Though I'm not sure how much salting actually gains us, because a malicious server only needs to re-hash the part of the rainbow table that corresponds to the partial hashes, which would be significantly less than the complete table.

With sending hash prefixes back and forth, we need to be careful that we don't introduce new attacks.  For example, if a clients sends an empty string, or "`a`" as the prefix, the IS should probably refuse to serve that request, as it could DoS the server and/or reveal more information than it should.  So an IS would need to be able to specify a minimum size of prefix that it is willing to serve.  (And then we need to figure out what happens if the server's minimum size is bigger than the client's maximum size that they're willing to send, which I'm guessing will just mean that the client is SOL.)  I think we'd need to spend some time figuring out what maximum/minimum sizes are reasonable.

Reviewer 2: I'm doing exactly that now :D

Reviewer 2: Updated method is posted here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134/files#r298691748

Please tear it to shreds.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 2: Here is another general writeup featuring a new scheme which is the result of iteration on the previous one, accompanied again by the original scheme. There's once more a privacy summary at the end of each, alongside the pros and cons of each.

## Two-part k-anonymity

Two new endpoints:

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`
- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup_hashes`

The following back-and-forth occurs between the client and server.

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

    alice@example.com
    bob@example.com
    carl@example.com
    +1 234 567 8910
    denny@example.com

The client will hash each 3PID (hashing details are described below) as a concatenation of the medium and address, separated by a space. Note that phone numbers should be formatted as defined by https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pstn-phone-numbers, before being hashed).

Then, the client sends the first `k` characters of each hash in an array, deduplicating any matching entries.

`k` is a value chosen by the client. It is a tradeoff between leaking the hashes of 3PIDs that the Identity Server doesn't know about, and the amount of hashing the server must perform. In addition to k, the client can also set a `max_k` that it is comfortable with. The recommended values are `k = 4` and `max_k = 6` (see below for the reasoning behind this). Let's say the client chooses these values.

    In preparing the values, a client should convert an email from
    "abcde@example.com" to "email abcde@example.com".

    NOTE: Example numbers, not real hash values.

    "email alice@example.com" -> 70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4
    "email bob@example.com"   -> 21375b56a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff
    "email carl@example.com"  -> 758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f
    "msisdn 12345678910"      -> 21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351
    "email denny@example.com" -> 70b1b5637937ab9846a94a8015e12313643a2f5323ca8f5b4ed6982fc8c3619b

    Note that pairs (bob@example.com, 12345678910) and (alice@example.com, denny@example.com)
    have the same leading characters in their hashed representations.

    POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

    {
      "hashes": [
        "70b1",
        "2137",
        "758a"
      ]
    }

The identity server, upon receiving these partial hashes, can see that the client chose `4` as its `k` value, which is the length of the shortest string. The identity server has a "minimum k", which is a function of the amount of 3PID hashes it currently holds and protects it against computing too many per lookup. Let's say the Identity Server's `min_k = 5` (again, see below for details). 

The client's `k` value (4) is less than the Identity Server's `min_k` (5), so it will reject the lookup with the following error:

```
{
  "errcode": "M_HASH_TOO_SHORT",
  "error": "Sent partial hashes are too short",
  "minimum_length": "5"
}
```

The client then knows it must send values of at least length 5. It's `max_k` is 6, so this is fine. The client sends the values again with `k = 5`:

    POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

    {
      "hashes": [
        "70b1b",
        "21375",
        "758af"
      ]
    }

The Identity Server sees the hashes are within an acceptable length (5 >= 5), then checks which hashes it knows of that match the given leading values. It will then return the next few characters (`n`; implementation-specific; lower means less information leaked to clients at the result of potentially more hashing to be done) of each that match:

    The identity server found the following hashes that contain the leading
    characters:

    70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4
    70b1b1b28dcfcc179a54983f46e1753c3fcdb0884d06fad741582c0180b56fc9
    21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351

    And if n = 7, the identity server will send back the following payload:

    {
     "hashes": {
        "70b1b": ["5637937", "1b28dcf"],
        "21375": ["b3f1b61"]
     }
    }

The client can then deduce which hashes actually lead to Matrix IDs. In this case, 70b1b5637937 are the leading characters of "alice@example.com" and "denny@example.com", while 21375b3f1b61 are the leading characters of "+12345678910" whereas 70b1b1b28dcf does not match any of the hashes the client has locally, so it is ignored. "bob@example.com" and "carl@example.com" do not seem to have Matrix IDs associated with them.

Finally, the client salts and hashes 3PIDs that it believes are associated with Matrix IDs and sends them to the identity server on the `/lookup_hashes` endpoint. Salting is performed to prevent an identity server generating a rainbow table to reverse any non-Matrix 3PIDs that slipped in. They would now need to create a rainbow table per lookup. This reduces the attack surface significantly to only targetted attacks.

    POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup_hashes

    {
      "prefixes": {
        "70b1b",
        "21375"
      },
      "hashes": {
        "1": "1f64ed6ac9d6da86b65bcc68a39c7c4d083f77193ec7e5adc4b09617f8d0d81a",
        "2": "a32e1c1f3b9e118eab196b0807443871628eace587361b7a02adfb2b77b8d620",
        "3": "70b1b5637937ab9846a94a8015e12313643a2f5323ca8f5b4ed6982fc8c3619b"
      },
      "salt": "saltabc"
    }

The server reads the prefixes and only rehashes those 3PIDs that match these hashes (being careful to continue to enforce its `min_k` requirement), and returns them:

    {
      "mappings": {
        "1": "@alice:example.com",
        "2": "@fred:example.com"
      }
    }

The client can now display which 3PIDs link to which Matrix IDs.

### How to pick k

The `k` value is a tradeoff between the privacy of the user's contacts, and the resource-intensiveness of lookups for the identity server. Clients would rather have a smaller `k`, while servers a larger `k`. A larger `k` also allows the identity server to learn more about the contacts the client has that are not Matrix users. Ideally we'd like to balance these two, and with the value also being a factor of how many records an identity server has, there's no way to simply give a single `k` value that should be used from the spec.

Instead, we can have the client and identity server decide it amongst themselves. The identity server should pick a `k` value based on how many 3PIDs records they have, and thus how much hashes they will need to perform. An ideal value can be calculated from the following function:

    C <= N / (64 ^ k)

    Where N is the number of 3PID records an identity server has, k is the number of
    characters to truncate each hash to, and C is the median number of hashing rounds
    an identity server will need to perform per hash (denoted complexity). 64 is the
    number of possible characters per byte in a hash, as hash digests are encoded in
    url-safe base64.

    Identity servers should choose a complexity value they're comfortable with.
    Let's say 5 (for reference, HIBP's service has set their k value for a complexity
    of 478: https://blog.cloudflare.com/validating-leaked-passwords-with-k-anonymity/)

    When C is set (implementation specific), k can then be solved for:

    k >= - log(C/N)
         ----------
         - log(64)
         
    Taking HIBP's amount of passwords as an example, 600,000,000, as N and solving for k, we get:
    
    k >= 4.47
    
    We round k to 5 for it to be a whole number.
    
    As this is quite a lot of records, we advise clients to start with k = 4, and go from there.
    
    For reference, a very small identity server with only 600 records would produce a
    minimum k of 0.628, or 1.
    
    From this we can see that even low k values scale to quite a lot of records.

Clients themselves should pick a reasonable default `k`, and a maximum value that they are comfortable extending towards if the identity server requests a higher minimum number. If the identity server requests too high of a minimum number, clients will need to inform the user, either with an error message, or more advanced clients could allow users to tweak their k values.

---

Past what they already knew, from this exchange the client and server have learned:

Client:

* Partial 3PID hash "70b1b1b28dcf" of some matrix user (fairly useless)
* alice@example.com -> @alice:example.com (required)
* +1 234 567 8910 -> @fred:example.com (required)

Server:

* Partial hash "758af" (likely useless)
* The client knows 70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4 (alice@example.com) (required)
* The client knows 21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351 (+12345678910) (required)
* The client knows some salted hash 70b1b5637937ab9846a94a8015e12313643a2f5323ca8f5b4ed6982fc8c3619bf (unknown, new rainbow table needed) (useless unless targetted attack)

---

Pros:

* Non-matrix contacts are kepts really private
* We can salt hashed uploads since they're filtered beforehand

Cons:

* More complex implementation
* More hashing required by the server, but not an insane amount

## The hashing-is-good-enough solution

We just send hashes to the identity server, and the IS responds with the MXIDs (we cannot salt as it would require rehashing the entire DB):

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

    alice@example.com
    bob@example.com
    carl@example.com
    +1 234 567 8910
    denny@example.com

The client will hash each 3PID as a
concatenation of the medium and address, separated by a space. Then send
each hash to the server as part of a dictionary.

    In preparing the values, a client should convert an email from
    "abcde@example.com" to "email abcde@example.com".

    NOTE: Example numbers, not real hash values.

    "email alice@example.com"   -> 70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4
    "email bob@example.com" -> 21375456a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff
    "email carl@example.com"   -> 758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f
    "msisdn 12345678910"      -> 21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351
    "email denny@example.com" -> 70b1b5637937ab9846a94a8015e12313643a2f5323ca8f5b4ed6982fc8c3619b

    POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

    {
      "hashes": {
        "1": "70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4", 
        "2": "21375456a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff", 
        "3": "758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f", 
        "4": "21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351",
        "5": "70b1b5637937ab9846a94a8015e12313643a2f5323ca8f5b4ed6982fc8c3619b"
      }
    }

The identity server will then respond with the Matrix IDs corresponding to the 3PIDs it is aware of:

    {
      "mappings":
        "1": "@alice:example.com",
        "4": "@fred:example.com"
      }
    }

---

Past what they already knew, from this exchange the client and server have learned:

Client:

* alice@example.com -> @alice:example.com (required)
* +1 234 567 8910 -> @fred:example.com (required)

Server:

* Full hash "70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4" (required)
* Full hash "21375b3f1b61c975b13c8cecd6481a82e239e6aad644c29dc815836188ae8351" (required)
* Full hash "21375456a47c2cdc41a0596549a16ec51b64d26eb47b8e915d45b18ed17b72ff" (full hash, potentially reversible; global rainbow table)
* Full hash "758afda64cb6a86ee6d540fa7c8b803a2479863e369cbafd71ffd376beef5d5f" (full hash, potentially reversible; global rainbow table)
* Full hash "70b1b5637937ab9846a94a8015e12313643a2f5323ca8f5b4ed6982fc8c3619b" (full hash, potentially reversible; global rainbow table)

---

Pros:

* Non-matrix contacts are easily retrievable still

Cons:

* Simple implementation
* Minimal hashing required
* Doesn't provide much more on top of what we have today

Reviewer 2: The above has been updated to include salting of each hash as per @mvgorcum's words.

Reviewer 9: > ```
> {
>   "mappings": {
>     "1": "@alice:example.com",
>     "2": "@fred:example.com"
>   }
> }
> ```
> 
> 
> The client can now display which 3PIDs link to which Matrix IDs.

How will the client know which MXIDs correspond to which 3PIDs? What is the key in the mappings object intended to be here?

Reviewer 2: @auscompgeek Ah, that should be a hash. Missed that when updating things last night. Thank you for pointing it out!

Reviewer 4: You can't use truncated hashes there, because they can still map to different 3pids, I think we have to use the full salted hashes as keys. Either that, or explicitly number the hashes we've sent.

Reviewer 9: What should the IS do if `lookup_hashes` receives an object with:
- a missing salts object?
- a salts object with a missing hash prefix?
- an empty salt? (the IS has received an unsalted hash in this case...)

Reviewer 2: > a missing salts object?
> a salts object with a missing hash prefix?

It should return `M_BAD_JSON` similar to is you didn't correctly follow any other client-server endpoint spec.

> an empty salt? (the IS has received an unsalted hash in this case...)

Identity Server implementations might get caught up in this case. I suppose they should just treat the hash as though it's unsalted and continue accordingly.

Reviewer 9: > A new salt is generated and applied to each hash individually.

Should this be hash prefix?

Reviewer 4: I think it needs to be added that this scheme still doesn't fully protect against the IS learning all phone numbers in the phonebook upon lookup.

That is because the amount of phone numbers is too small; the IS can create a full database of all hashes of all phone numbers, and then use the k-anonymity-based scheme to obtain salted hashes for all the phone numbers in the address book. This does mean it will have to rehash a linear factor of the amount of phone number in the addressbook, rather than a linear factor of the amount of phone numbers in the addressbook that have an mxid mapping, but it is still quite doable.

Advantage of this scheme is that the client can explicitly know how many salted hashes are asked by the IS, which is a datapoint that could feasibly be used by clients to detect malicious IS-es.

Reviewer 2: > > A new salt is generated and applied to each hash individually.
> 
> Should this be hash prefix?

Good point, yes.

I'm going to start moving this into the PR itself.

clients MUST agree to its use with the string `sha256`. SHA-256 was chosen as
it is currently used throughout the Matrix spec, as well as its properties of
being quick to hash. While this reduces the resources necessary to generate a
rainbow table for attackers, a fast hash is necessary if particularly slow
mobile clients are going to be hashing thousands of contact details.

When performing a lookup, the pepper and hashing algorithm the client used must
be part of the request body. If they do not match what the server has on file
(which may be the case if the pepper was changed right after the client's
request for it), then the server must inform the client that they need to query
the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which
clients would assume to mean that no contacts are registered on that identity
server.

If the algorithm does not match the server's, the server should return a `400
M_INVALID_PARAM`. If the pepper does not match the server's, the server should
return a new error code, 400 `M_INVALID_PEPPER`. A new error code is not
defined for an invalid algorithm as that is considered a client bug.

> Each of these error responses should contain the correct `algorithm` and

Reviewer 5: M_INVALID_PARAM has an existing shape; you can't go adding additional fields to it.

Other options:
* use the same error code for bad pepper and bad hash alg
* assume that the hash alg is unlikely to change often enough that it is worth handling in this way

Reviewer 2: I believe an `M_INVALID_PARAM` would be returned without the extra details. The extra details would only be there for the `M_INVALID_PEPPER` error.

Seems I need to make this clearer.

    "email carl@example.commatrixrocks"  -> "ryr10d1K8fcFVxALb3egiSquqvFAxQEwegXtlHoQFBw"
    "msisdn 12345678910matrixrocks"      -> "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens"
    "email denny@example.commatrixrocks" -> "bxt8rtRaOzMkSk49zIKE_NfqTndHvGbWHchZskW3xmY"

    POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

    {
      "hashes": [
        "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs",
        "r0-6x3rp9zIWS2suIque-wXTnlv9sc41fatbRMEOwQE",
        "ryr10d1K8fcFVxALb3egiSquqvFAxQEwegXtlHoQFBw",
        "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens",
        "bxt8rtRaOzMkSk49zIKE_NfqTndHvGbWHchZskW3xmY"
      ],
      "algorithm": "sha256",
      "pepper": "matrixrocks"
    }

The identity server, upon receiving these hashes, can simply compare against
the hashes of the 3PIDs it stores.  The server then responds with the Matrix
IDs of those that match:

    {
      "mappings": {
        "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs": "@alice:example.com",
        "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens": "@fred:example.com"
      }
    }

The client can now display which 3PIDs link to which Matrix IDs.

> No parameter changes will be made to /bind as part of this proposal.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
No parameter changes will be made to [/bind](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-bind) as part of this proposal.
```

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the

> implementation, and should return a 403 `M_FORBIDDEN` error if so.

Reviewer 5: mmm I guess. It wouldn't be unreasonable to allow servers to skip implementing the v1 api altogether and return a 404.

Reviewer 2: This is what I was originally proposing.

@turt2live ?

Reviewer: I'm getting tired of having to explain the rationale here. This will be the 7th time I've had to explain it either on this MSC or in a room somewhere.

404 implies that the endpoints don't exist, not that they are disabled. 403 implies that the requesting party is not authorized to use the endpoint (there is no requirement of temporary auth problems, or changing auth will fix the issue - just that the party can't make the request). 401 is for authentication, not authorization.

Therefore we should serve a 403 because the endpoints do exist in the spec but are not allowed by the implementation. A future iteration of the spec (after v1 is completely removed) would allow for a 404.

Reviewer 5: well that seems fair and pretty much what I anticipated. Sorry, I didn't realise this had already been discussed.

plain-text 3PIDs (third-party IDs) which means that the identity server can
identify and record every 3PID that the user has in their contacts, whether
that email address or phone number is already known by the identity server or
not.

If the 3PID is hashed, the identity server could not determine the address
unless it has already seen that address in plain-text during a previous call of
the [/bind
mechanism](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-bind)
(without significant resources to reverse the hashes).

This proposal thus calls for the Identity Service API's
[/lookup](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#get-matrix-identity-api-v1-lookup)
endpoint to use hashed 3PIDs instead of their plain-text counterparts (and to
deprecate both it and
[/bulk_lookup](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-bulk-lookup)),
which will leak less data to identity servers.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints. Instead, this proposal consolidates them into a single `/lookup`

> endpoint. Additionally, the endpoint should be on a `v2` path, to avoid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
endpoint. Additionally, the endpoint is to be on a `v2` path, to avoid
```

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

    alice@example.com
    bob@example.com
    carl@example.com
    +1 234 567 8910
    denny@example.com

The client will hash each 3PID as a concatenation of the medium and address,
separated by a space and a pepper appended to the end. Note that phone numbers
should be formatted as defined by
https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pstn-phone-numbers, before being
hashed). First the client must prepend the medium to the address:

     "alice@example.com" -> "email alice@example.com"
     "bob@example.com"   -> "email bob@example.com"  
     "carl@example.com"  -> "email carl@example.com" 
     "+1 234 567 8910"   -> "msisdn 12345678910"     
     "denny@example.com" -> "email denny@example.com"

Hashes must be peppered in order to reduce both the information a client gains
during the process, and attacks the identity server can perform (namely sending
a rainbow table of hashes back in the response to `/lookup`).

In order for clients to know the pepper and hashing algorithm they should use,
Identity Servers must make the information available on the `/hash_details`
endpoint:

>     GET /_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details

Reviewer: code block this request please

    {
      "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
      "algorithms": ["sha256"]
    }

The name `lookup_pepper` was chosen in order to account for pepper values being
returned for other endpoints in the future. The contents of `lookup_pepper`
MUST match the regular expression `[a-zA-Z0-9]*`.

>     The client should append the pepper to the end of the 3pid string before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The client should append the pepper to the end of the 3PID string before
```

    hashing.

    "email alice@example.com" -> "email alice@example.commatrixrocks"
    "email bob@example.com"   -> "email bob@example.commatrixrocks"  
    "email carl@example.com"  -> "email carl@example.commatrixrocks" 
    "msisdn 12345678910"      -> "msisdn 12345678910matrixrocks"     
    "email denny@example.com" -> "email denny@example.commatrixrocks"

Clients SHOULD request this endpoint each time before performing a lookup, to
handle identity servers which may rotate their pepper values frequently.
Clients MUST choose one of the given hash algorithms to encrypt the 3PID during
lookup.

Note that possible hashing algorithms will be defined in the Matrix
specification, and an Identity Server can choose to implement one or all of
them. Later versions of the specification may deprecate algorithms when
necessary. Currently the only listed hashing algorithm is SHA-256 as defined by

> [RFC 4634](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634) and Identity Servers and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[RFC 4634](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634) which Identity Servers and
```

> clients MUST agree to its use with the string `sha256`. SHA-256 was chosen as

Reviewer: this sentence should be altered to say that at a minimum both implementations must support sha256, but can negotiate other algorithms using this functionality. Use case would be a custom IS and client built on Matrix which specifically wants to use a certain hashing algorithm for some reason. Both implementations would still be required to support sha256 though as a baseline/fallback.

@mscbot concern Overly restrictive hash algorithm negotiation

it is currently used throughout the Matrix spec, as well as its properties of
being quick to hash. While this reduces the resources necessary to generate a
rainbow table for attackers, a fast hash is necessary if particularly slow
mobile clients are going to be hashing thousands of contact details.

When performing a lookup, the pepper and hashing algorithm the client used must
be part of the request body. If they do not match what the server has on file
(which may be the case if the pepper was changed right after the client's
request for it), then the server must inform the client that they need to query
the hash details again, instead of just returning an empty response, which
clients would assume to mean that no contacts are registered on that identity
server.

If the algorithm does not match the server's, the server should return a `400
M_INVALID_PARAM`. If the pepper does not match the server's, the server should

> return a new error code, 400 `M_INVALID_PEPPER`. A new error code is not

Reviewer: Consistency:
```suggestion
return a new error code, `400 M_INVALID_PEPPER`. A new error code is not
```

defined for an invalid algorithm as that is considered a client bug.

Each of these error responses should contain the correct `algorithm` and
`lookup_pepper` fields. This is to prevent the client from needing to query
`/hash_details` again, thus saving a round-trip. An example response to an
incorrect pepper would be:

>     {    

Reviewer: code block

      "error": "Incorrect value for lookup_pepper",
      "errcode": "M_INVALID_PEPPER",
      "algorithm": "sha256",
      "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks"
    }

Now comes time for the lookup. Note that the resulting hash digest MUST be
encoded in URL-safe unpadded base64 (similar to [room version 4's event
IDs](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v4#event-ids)). Once hashing has been
performed using the defined hashing algorithm, the client sends each hash in an
array.

    "email alice@example.commatrixrocks" -> "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs"
    "email bob@example.commatrixrocks"   -> "r0-6x3rp9zIWS2suIque-wXTnlv9sc41fatbRMEOwQE"
    "email carl@example.commatrixrocks"  -> "ryr10d1K8fcFVxALb3egiSquqvFAxQEwegXtlHoQFBw"
    "msisdn 12345678910matrixrocks"      -> "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens"
    "email denny@example.commatrixrocks" -> "bxt8rtRaOzMkSk49zIKE_NfqTndHvGbWHchZskW3xmY"

>     POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

Reviewer: code block

    {
      "hashes": [
        "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs",
        "r0-6x3rp9zIWS2suIque-wXTnlv9sc41fatbRMEOwQE",
        "ryr10d1K8fcFVxALb3egiSquqvFAxQEwegXtlHoQFBw",
        "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens",
        "bxt8rtRaOzMkSk49zIKE_NfqTndHvGbWHchZskW3xmY"
      ],
      "algorithm": "sha256",
      "pepper": "matrixrocks"
    }

The identity server, upon receiving these hashes, can simply compare against
the hashes of the 3PIDs it stores.  The server then responds with the Matrix
IDs of those that match:

>     {

Reviewer: code block

      "mappings": {
        "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs": "@alice:example.com",
        "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens": "@fred:example.com"
      }
    }

The client can now display which 3PIDs link to which Matrix IDs.

No parameter changes will be made to
[/bind](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-bind)
as part of this proposal.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the
implementation, and should return a 403 `M_FORBIDDEN` error if so.

If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 400 or 404 is received when
accessing the `v2` endpoint, they should fallback to the `v1` endpoint instead.
However, clients should be aware that plain-text 3PIDs are required for the
`v1` endpoint, and SHOULD ask for user consent to send 3PIDs in plain-text, and
be clear about where they are being sent to.

## Tradeoffs

* There is a small cost incurred by performing hashes before requests, but this
  is outweighed by the privacy implications of sending plain-text addresses.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer: I'm surprised this isn't the "Security considerations" section. It also should mention that phone numbers and short emails are more susceptible to hash reversal due to their length (and how the padding should help fix this, at risk of creating anchor points for people to brute force the hash).

Reviewer 2: By "padding" you mean peppering, correct?

Also not entirely sure what you mean by anchor points.

Reviewer: padding meaning prefixing the type and including a pepper. An "anchor point" would be the 3PID type: if I know that all the hashes start with 2 possible values, I can quickly identify whether or not I'm looking at a phone number or email, and brute force my way to the pepper (or what might be the pepper) so I can ignore it in my future brute force attempts.

Disclaimer: this is based off a potentially horrible understanding of how hashing works.

Reviewer 2: Ah, true, that is a good point. We may want to switch the address and medium components around such that attackers can't work halfway through a hash relatively quickly, just as we did for the address and pepper.

that it may not provide more privacy if an identity server decided to be evil,
however it would significantly raise the resource requirements to run an evil
identity server. 

Discussion and a walk-through of what a client/identity-server interaction would
look like are documented [in this Github
comment](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r298691748).

Additionally, a radical model was also considered where the first portion of
the above scheme was done with an identity server, and the second would be done
with various homeservers who originally reported the 3PID to the identity
server. While interesting and a more decentralised model, some attacks are
still possible if the identity server is running an evil homeserver which it
can direct the client to send its hashes to. Discussion on this matter has
taken place in the MSC-specific room [starting at this
message](https://matrix.to/#/!LlraCeVuFgMaxvRySN:amorgan.xyz/$4wzTSsspbLVa6Lx5cBq6toh6P3TY3YnoxALZuO8n9gk?via=amorgan.xyz&via=matrix.org&via=matrix.vgorcum.com).

## Conclusion

This proposal outlines a simple method to stop bulk collection of user's

> contact lists and their social graphs without any disastrous side effects. All

Reviewer: This point of the conclusion needs to be much higher in the proposal. After reading the entire thing I was left with "but why are we doing this? The IS would still be storing 3PIDs in plain text, so what's the point in hashing only lookups?" - this sentence answers this question: because the IS may not know about a particular address and could be maliciously collecting it. This does subsequently raise the question of why people are sending their address books to untrusted sources though, and how that fits into the security model for Matrix.

So I raise the question again: what's the point of this MSC? What practical problems does it solve?

Reviewer 4: The current form of this MSC, as far as I can see, does two things:
- It signals that the identity server is not meant to be used to collect the full content of all address books upon a bulk lookup. Unfortunately that's not possible without trusting that the identity server doesn't *try* to collect all data, even with this proposal. The only real value it has is in the signal it sends.
- Raise the bar of obtaining the full list of mixds registered at an identity server, by requiring the attacker to build a custom rainbow table for said IS. This is still not adequate protection against such a data extraction, but may help deter lazy attackers.

Reviewer: resolving this to raise the concern elsewhere in the diff.

preserve consistency across other endpoints:

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`

A second endpoint is added for clients to request information about the form
the server expects hashes in.

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details`

The following back-and-forth occurs between the client and server.

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

```
alice@example.com
bob@example.com
carl@example.com
+1 234 567 8910
denny@example.com
```

The client will hash each 3PID as a concatenation of the medium and address,
separated by a space and a pepper appended to the end. Note that phone numbers
should be formatted as defined by
https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pstn-phone-numbers, before being
hashed). First the client must prepend the medium to the address:

```
"alice@example.com" -> "email alice@example.com"
"bob@example.com"   -> "email bob@example.com"  
"carl@example.com"  -> "email carl@example.com" 
"+1 234 567 8910"   -> "msisdn 12345678910"     
"denny@example.com" -> "email denny@example.com"
```

Hashes must be peppered in order to reduce both the information a client gains
during the process, and attacks the identity server can perform (namely sending

> a rainbow table of hashes back in the response to `/lookup`).

Reviewer 4: The wording here is a bit confusing from my perspective. The pepper is added to stop clients (be it full matrix clients, or just a `curl`) from using generic rainbowtables, but the current sentence seems to suggest that the identity server can send rainbow tables.
I would suggest something like:

>Hashes must be peppered in order to reduce both the information a client gains during the process, and attacks the identity server can perform. Clients will have to generate a full rainbow table specific to the set pepper to obtain all registered MXIDs, while the server has to generate a full rainbow table with the specific pepper to get the plaintext 3pids for non-matrix users.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, I think this was left over from the multi-step process where an IS could send back many possible partial hashes in order for the client to respond with all of its full hashes from its address book.

Thanks for the suggestion, will take it!

hashed). First the client must prepend the medium to the address:

```
"alice@example.com" -> "email alice@example.com"
"bob@example.com"   -> "email bob@example.com"  
"carl@example.com"  -> "email carl@example.com" 
"+1 234 567 8910"   -> "msisdn 12345678910"     
"denny@example.com" -> "email denny@example.com"
```

Hashes must be peppered in order to reduce both the information an identity
server gains during the process, and attacks the client can perform. Clients
will have to generate a full rainbow table specific to the set pepper to
obtain all registered MXIDs, while the server has to generate a full rainbow
table with the specific pepper to get the plaintext 3pids for non-matrix
users.

In order for clients to know the pepper and hashing algorithm they should use,
Identity servers must make the information available on the `/hash_details`
endpoint:

```
GET /_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details

{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithms": ["sha256"]
}
```

The name `lookup_pepper` was chosen in order to account for pepper values being
returned for other endpoints in the future. The contents of `lookup_pepper`

> MUST match the regular expression `[a-zA-Z0-9]*`.

Reviewer 9: This allows for an empty (i.e. no) pepper. Is this intended? (If so, should clients warn in this case?)

  ],
  "algorithm": "sha256",
  "pepper": "matrixrocks"
}
```

The identity server, upon receiving these hashes, can simply compare against
the hashes of the 3PIDs it stores.  The server then responds with the Matrix
IDs of those that match:

```
{
  "mappings": {
    "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs": "@alice:example.com",
    "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens": "@fred:example.com"
  }
}
```

The client can now display which 3PIDs link to which Matrix IDs.

No parameter changes will be made to
[/bind](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-bind)
as part of this proposal.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the
implementation, and should return a `403 M_FORBIDDEN` error if so.

If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 400 or 404 is received when
accessing the `v2` endpoint, they should fallback to the `v1` endpoint instead.
However, clients should be aware that plain-text 3PIDs are required for the
`v1` endpoint, and SHOULD ask for user consent to send 3PIDs in plain-text, and
be clear about where they are being sent to.

> ## Tradeoffs

Reviewer: @mscbot concern Transparent identity servers are no longer possible with this MSC.

There are identity server implementations in the wild which don't store bindings on their own and instead rely on a backend (LDAP, etc). The IS might not know that bob@example.org is bound to anything until it asks the backend to find out. If it is given a hash to look up, it won't be able to function anymore.

Reviewer 2: Good point. Not sure if there's a way to solve this without a way to query every known address from the backend.

Reviewer: querying all known addresses in a many-thousand employee company sounds like a bad idea.

Reviewer 4: I would argue that the way to 'solve' this is by keeping v1 around for transparent IS-es.

Reviewer: If we have any intention of keeping the v1 endpoints around I'd much rather we added a `?format` parameter to the v2 endpoint. There's not much value in keeping around the v1 endpoints given we're about to ratchet the whole IS spec to v2.

Reviewer 2: How is the client able to know which format to use?

Reviewer: excellent question for a MSC ;)

In practice it's probably something along the lines of having a hash algorithm of "unhashed"

Reviewer 2: Have added one called `"none" (since I could totally see someone making a hashing algorithm called "unhashed").

I avoided just having an empty string meaning no hashing, as that could be a little confusing.

preserve consistency across other endpoints:

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`

A second endpoint is added for clients to request information about the form
the server expects hashes in.

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details`

The following back-and-forth occurs between the client and server.

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

```
alice@example.com
bob@example.com
carl@example.com
+1 234 567 8910
denny@example.com
```

The client will hash each 3PID as a concatenation of the medium and address,
separated by a space and a pepper appended to the end. Note that phone numbers
should be formatted as defined by
https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pstn-phone-numbers, before being
hashed). First the client must append the medium to the address:

```
"alice@example.com" -> "alice@example.com email"
"bob@example.com"   -> "bob@example.com email"
"carl@example.com"  -> "carl@example.com email"
"+1 234 567 8910"   -> "12345678910 msisdn"
"denny@example.com" -> "denny@example.com email"
```

Hashes must be peppered in order to reduce both the information an identity
server gains during the process, and attacks the client can perform. Clients

> will have to generate a full rainbow table specific to the set pepper to

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
would have to generate a full rainbow table specific to the set pepper to
```

"will have to" sounds like it's a thing we want them to do!

Reviewer 5: (this whole sentence might be better as a footnote to avoid interrupting the description of how it is meant to be used, but ymmv on that)

> obtain all registered MXIDs, while the server has to generate a full rainbow

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
obtain all registered MXIDs, while the server would have to generate a full rainbow
```

table with the specific pepper to get the plaintext 3pids for non-matrix
users.

In order for clients to know the pepper and hashing algorithm they should use,
Identity servers must make the information available on the `/hash_details`
endpoint:

```
GET /_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details

{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithms": ["sha256"]
}
```

The name `lookup_pepper` was chosen in order to account for pepper values
being returned for other endpoints in the future. The contents of
`lookup_pepper` MUST match the regular expression `[a-zA-Z0-9]+` (unless no
hashing is being performed, as described below). If `lookup_pepper` is an

> empty string, clients MUST cease the lookup operation.

Reviewer 5: unless `algorithm == "m.none"`, apparently?

```

> The client should append the pepper to the end of the 3PID string before

Reviewer 5: this should be outside the ``` ?

hashing.

"alice@example.com email" -> "alice@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"bob@example.com email"   -> "bob@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"carl@example.com email"  -> "carl@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"12345678910 msdisn"      -> "12345678910 msisdnmatrixrocks"
"denny@example.com email" -> "denny@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
```

Clients SHOULD request this endpoint each time before performing a lookup, to
handle identity servers which may rotate their pepper values frequently.
Clients MUST choose one of the given hash algorithms to encrypt the 3PID
during lookup.

> At a minimum, clients and identity servers MUST support SHA-256 as defined by

Reviewer 5: sounds like clients have to support `m.none` as well as `sha256`.

Reviewer 2: What do you think of the wording now?

[RFC 4634](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634), identified by the
`algorithm` value `"sha256"`. SHA-256 was chosen as it is currently used
throughout the Matrix spec, as well as its properties of being quick to hash.
While this reduces the resources necessary to generate a rainbow table for
attackers, a fast hash is necessary if particularly slow mobile clients are
going to be hashing thousands of contact details. Other algorithms can be
negotiated by the client and server at their discretion.

There are certain situations when an identity server cannot be expected to

> compare hashed 3PID values; When a server is connected to a backend provider

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
compare hashed 3PID values: for example, when a server is connected to a backend provider
```

such as LDAP, there is no way for the identity server to efficiently pull all
of the addresses and hash them. For this case, the `algorithm` field of `GET

> /hash_details` may be set to `"m.none"`, and `lookup_pepper` will be an empty

Reviewer 5: so we have `m.none` and `sha256` ? why does one get an `m.` prefix and one not?

Reviewer 2: It was to differentiate between "no hashing algorithm" and "an algorithm called none", however perhaps prepending `m.` isn't the best way to go about that?

Reviewer 5: I think, in a world where someone invents a hashing algorithm called "none", we'll cross that bridge when we get to it...

Reviewer 2: ok lol

Reviewer 9: This was raised here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r303021985

If this is a concern, we could list `null` instead maybe?

string. No hashing will be performed if the client and server decide on this,

> and 3PIDs will be sent in plain-text, similar to the v1 `/lookup` API.

Reviewer 5: Presumably the client is expected to ask for consent in this case, in the same way as falling back to the /v1 api?

# MSC2134: Identity Hash Lookups

[Issue #2130](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2130) has been

> recently created in response to a security issue brought up by an independent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
created in response to a security issue brought up by an independent
```

"recently" means nothing when we read this 2 years from now.

plain-text 3PIDs (third-party IDs) which means that the identity server can
identify and record every 3PID that the user has in their contacts, whether
that email address or phone number is already known by the identity server or
not.

If the 3PID is hashed, the identity server could not determine the address
unless it has already seen that address in plain-text during a previous call
of the [/bind
mechanism](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-bind)
(without significant resources to reverse the hashes). This helps prevent
bulk collection of user's contact lists by the identity server and reduces
its ability to build social graphs.

This proposal thus calls for the Identity Service API's
[/lookup](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#get-matrix-identity-api-v1-lookup)
endpoint to use hashed 3PIDs instead of their plain-text counterparts (and to
deprecate both it and
[/bulk_lookup](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-bulk-lookup)),
which will leak less data to identity servers.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup

> endpoints. Instead, this proposal consolidates them into a single `/lookup`

Reviewer: The second sentence ("Instead, ...") is awkward: it reads like the previous sentence is immediately invalidated when in fact it is trying to propose the change. Possibly this wording is better?
```suggestion
endpoints. Both endpoints are to be consolidated into a single `/lookup`
```

A second endpoint is added for clients to request information about the form
the server expects hashes in.

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details`

The following back-and-forth occurs between the client and server.

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

```
alice@example.com
bob@example.com
carl@example.com
+1 234 567 8910
denny@example.com
```

The client will hash each 3PID as a concatenation of the medium and address,
separated by a space and a pepper appended to the end. Note that phone numbers
should be formatted as defined by
https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pstn-phone-numbers, before being
hashed). First the client must append the medium to the address:

```
"alice@example.com" -> "alice@example.com email"
"bob@example.com"   -> "bob@example.com email"
"carl@example.com"  -> "carl@example.com email"
"+1 234 567 8910"   -> "12345678910 msisdn"
"denny@example.com" -> "denny@example.com email"
```

Hashes must be peppered in order to reduce both the information an identity
server gains during the process, and attacks the client can perform. [0]

In order for clients to know the pepper and hashing algorithm they should use,

> Identity servers must make the information available on the `/hash_details`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identity servers must make the information available on the `/hash_details`
```

endpoint:

```
GET /_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details

{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithms": ["sha256"]
}
```

The name `lookup_pepper` was chosen in order to account for pepper values
being returned for other endpoints in the future. The contents of
`lookup_pepper` MUST match the regular expression `[a-zA-Z0-9]+` (unless no

> hashing is being performed, as described below). If hashing is being

Reviewer: so I can have a pepper of "🐶" so long as I don't have hashing?

Reviewer 2: Mm, it says later that if using `"none"` as the algorithm then `lookup_pepper` must be an empty string.

Reviewer: it still awkwardly says that if you're not doing hashing then you can do whatever you want. The intent is obvious, but I would still probably reword this to be something like "The pepper must match the regex `[a-zA-Z0-9]+`. When the server only supports the `none` algorithm, this endpoint must return an error."

Reviewer: ... except the endpoint is used for determining if `none` can be used. In that case some words to say "The pepper must match the regex `[a-zA-Z0-9]+`." and always require a value (which might be `"noop"` or something).

performed, and `lookup_pepper` is an empty string, clients MUST cease the
lookup operation.

The client should append the pepper to the end of the 3PID string before
hashing.

```
"alice@example.com email" -> "alice@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"bob@example.com email"   -> "bob@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"carl@example.com email"  -> "carl@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"12345678910 msdisn"      -> "12345678910 msisdnmatrixrocks"
"denny@example.com email" -> "denny@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
```

Clients SHOULD request this endpoint each time before performing a lookup, to
handle identity servers which may rotate their pepper values frequently.
Clients MUST choose one of the given hash algorithms to encrypt the 3PID
during lookup.

Clients and identity servers MUST support SHA-256 as defined by [RFC
4634](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634), identified by the `algorithm`
value `"sha256"`. SHA-256 was chosen as it is currently used throughout the
Matrix spec, as well as its properties of being quick to hash. While this
reduces the resources necessary to generate a rainbow table for attackers, a
fast hash is necessary if particularly slow mobile clients are going to be

> hashing thousands of contact details. Other algorithms can be negotiated by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hashing thousands of contact details. Other algorithms are negotiated by
```

the client and server at their discretion.

There are certain situations when an identity server cannot be expected to
compare hashed 3PID values; for example, when a server is connected to a
backend provider such as LDAP, there is no way for the identity server to
efficiently pull all of the addresses and hash them. For this case, clients

> and server MUST also support sending plain-text 3PID values. To agree upon

Reviewer 5: servers

though do servers actually have to support this?

Reviewer: also how do we enforce client support? It sounds perfectly valid for a client to say "lolnope, your IS supports unhashed identifiers" and refuse to speak to the IS.

Reviewer 2: In that case then the client doesn't get to lookup contacts?

Reviewer: the point is that we can't say that the client MUST do something when we can't enforce it.

Reviewer 2: So we should only say servers MUST enforce this?

Reviewer 2: Or that we shouldn't make this a MUST for servers or clients, because they may refuse that this is necessary.

Reviewer 2: Hopefully the new wording in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134/commits/3b8c57e06ca961c6842ab409b64f825b8884c573 should suffice.

> this, the `algorithm` field of `GET /hash_details` MUST be set to `"none"`,

Reviewer: This field doesn't exist - it's an array, and called `algorithms`.

> this, the `algorithm` field of `GET /hash_details` MUST be set to `"none"`,

Reviewer: This also prevents an IS from supporting hashed and unhashed lookups. It also sounds valid for an IS to support some identifiers itself but fall back on LDAP. I would argue that `/hash_details` throw an error when the server doesn't support hashing, and return relevant information for real hashing algorithms (ie: sha256) when it does.

Reviewer 2: Throwing an error does solve the problem of a hash eventually being called "none" some day, but the idea of the IS being able to present `["none", "sha256"]`, and only searching a subset of hashes if `"sha256"` is selected is interesting.

It may be confusing though, as clients would never select `"none"` if `"sha256"` was an option, and thus they'll never be able to look up LDAP contacts, so maybe it should just be one or the other.

Reviewer: Riot might never select it, but we can't say that someone's proprietary directory lookup won't. Email deployments in companies are weird enough already where I can see a "secure" employee directory being used with sha256 and inter-team communication being done through the LDAP interface.

Reviewer 2: I believe the current setup is now flexible enough for this.

whereas `lookup_pepper` will be an empty string. No hashing will be performed
if the client and server decide on this, and 3PIDs will be sent in
plain-text, similar to the v1 `/lookup` API. When this occurs, it is STRONGLY
RECOMMENDED for the client to prompt the user before continuing, and receive

> consent for sending 3PID details in plain-text to the identity server.

Reviewer: the bit about consent is a localized concern: a full stop after "before continuing" is fine.

When performing a lookup, the pepper and hashing algorithm the client used
must be part of the request body (even when using the `"none"` algorithm
value). If they do not match what the server has on file (which may be the
case if the pepper was changed right after the client's request for it), then
the server must inform the client that they need to query the hash details
again, instead of just returning an empty response, which clients would
assume to mean that no contacts are registered on that identity server.

> If the algorithm does not match the server's, the server should return a `400

Reviewer: The server can support multiple algorithms, so what is it matching against? It sounds like you're looking for:
```suggestion
If the algorithm is not supported by the server, the server should return a `400
```

M_INVALID_PARAM`. If the pepper does not match the server's, the server should
return a new error code, `400 M_INVALID_PEPPER`. A new error code is not
defined for an invalid algorithm as that is considered a client bug.

> The `M_INVALID_PEPPER` error response should contain the correct `algorithm`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `M_INVALID_PEPPER` error response contain the correct `algorithm`
```

This sounds like a recommendation that we should make required instead.

and `lookup_pepper` fields. This is to prevent the client from needing to

> query `/hash_details` again, thus saving a round-trip. `M_INVALID_PARAM` does

Reviewer: Extreme nit: it might not be a round trip on some HTTP versions due to keepalive, etc.
```suggestion
query `/hash_details` again, thus saving a request. `M_INVALID_PARAM` does
```

not include these fields. An example response to an incorrect pepper would
be:

```
{    
  "error": "Incorrect value for lookup_pepper",
  "errcode": "M_INVALID_PEPPER",
  "algorithm": "sha256",
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks"
}
```

Now comes time for the lookup. Note that the resulting hash digest MUST be
encoded in URL-safe unpadded base64 (similar to [room version 4's event
IDs](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v4#event-ids)). Once hashing has been

> performed using the defined hashing algorithm, the client sends each hash in an

Reviewer: And if the hashing is `none`? Do we send `base64(address + " emailmatrixrocks")`?

Reviewer 2: Nope, need to fix that.

POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

{
  "hashes": [
    "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs",
    "r0-6x3rp9zIWS2suIque-wXTnlv9sc41fatbRMEOwQE",
    "ryr10d1K8fcFVxALb3egiSquqvFAxQEwegXtlHoQFBw",
    "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens",
    "bxt8rtRaOzMkSk49zIKE_NfqTndHvGbWHchZskW3xmY"
  ],
  "algorithm": "sha256",
  "pepper": "matrixrocks"
}
```

The identity server, upon receiving these hashes, can simply compare against
the hashes of the 3PIDs it stores.  The server then responds with the Matrix
IDs of those that match:

```
{
  "mappings": {
    "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs": "@alice:example.com",
    "c_30UaSZhl5tyanIjFoE1IXTmuU3vmptEwVOc3P2Ens": "@fred:example.com"
  }
}
```

The client can now display which 3PIDs link to which Matrix IDs.

No parameter changes will be made to
[/bind](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-bind)
as part of this proposal.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the
implementation, and should return a `403 M_FORBIDDEN` error if so.

If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 400 or 404 is received when

> accessing the `v2` endpoint, they should fallback to the `v1` endpoint instead.

Reviewer: who is they?

However, clients should be aware that plain-text 3PIDs are required for the

> `v1` endpoint, and SHOULD ask for user consent to send 3PIDs in plain-text, and

Reviewer: again: consent is a thing that is localized. Let's change this to "However, clients should be aware that plaintext 3PIDs are required for the `v1` endpoints and are strongly encouraged to warn the user of this."

be clear about where they are being sent to.

## Tradeoffs

* There is a small cost incurred by performing hashes before requests, but this

>   is outweighed by the privacy implications of sending plain-text addresses.

Reviewer: I ***really*** want the privacy implications to be spelled out a lot more clearly at the top of this proposal. Being 218 lines in and still wondering why we need this is not a very good feeling.

Reviewer 2: Should be much clearer now?

## Security Considerations

Hashes are still reversible with a rainbow table, but the provided pepper,
which can be rotated by identity servers at will, should help mitigate this.
Phone numbers (with their relatively short possible address space of 12
numbers), short email addresses, and addresses of both type that have been
leaked in database dumps are more susceptible to hash reversal.

Mediums and peppers are appended to the address as to prevent a common prefix
for each plain-text string, which prevents attackers from pre-computing bits
of a stream cipher.

> Additionally, this proposal does not stop an identity server from storing

Reviewer: to be fair, I don't think we can reasonably protect against this as a protocol. Our domain of concern is the wire format and behaviour - how a server persists information is its problem. It's like saying that all homeservers must use postgresql - we can't enforce that.

Reviewer 2: True, and we can't stop them from being sent to the server either since they need to be sent at `/bind` anyways.

plain-text 3PIDs. There is a GDPR argument in keeping email addresses, such
that if a breach happens, users must be notified of such. Ideally this would be
done over Matrix, but people may've stuck their email in an identity server and
then left Matrix forever. Perhaps if only hashes were being stored on the
identity server then that isn't considered personal information? In any case, a
discussion for another MSC.

## Other considered solutions

Ideally identity servers would never receive plain-text addresses, however it
is necessary for the identity server to send email/sms messages during a

> bind, as it cannot trust a homeserver to do so as the homeserver may be lying.

Reviewer: this should go into a bit more detail: what would the homeserver be lying about?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I can expand on it, especially if we figure out a way to go down this path in the future.

In short it's asking if we can eradicate identity servers by moving the job of verifying user 3PIDs to the homeserver that user is residing on. Your homeserver would then ask their homeserver for this information. Unfortunately, the homeserver your homeserver is asking could easily just lie and say "yes, I do have a user for president@us.gov, he is @evilhacker:badhs.com".

Thus the centralized identity server needs to remain the single source of truth.

I don't want to sprawl out more futuristic ideas on this MSC, just note that what has been discussed over the course of its lifetime.

Bloom filters are an alternative method of providing private contact discovery.
However, they do not scale well due to requiring clients to download a large
filter that needs updating every time a new bind is made. Further considered
solutions are explored in https://signal.org/blog/contact-discovery/. Signal's
eventual solution of using Software Guard Extensions (detailed in
https://signal.org/blog/private-contact-discovery/) is considered impractical
for a federated network, as it requires specialized hardware.

k-anonymity was considered as an alternative, in which the identity server
would never receive a full hash of a 3PID that it did not already know about.
While this has been considered plausible, it comes with heightened resource
requirements (much more hashing by the identity server). The conclusion was
that it may not provide more privacy if an identity server decided to be evil,
however it would significantly raise the resource requirements to run an evil
identity server. 

> Discussion and a walk-through of what a client/identity-server interaction would

Reviewer: This paragraph should be merged with the previous. On its own, it serves no value beyond confusing the reader.

known to attackers, it is unlikely that it would be included in a rainbow
table.

Thus the approach of hashing, while adding complexity to implementation and
resource consumption of the client and identity server, does provide added
difficulty for the identity server to carry out contact detail harvesting,
which should be considered worthwhile.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup
endpoints, consolidating them into a single `/lookup` endpoint. The endpoint
is to be on a `v2` path, to avoid confusion with the original `v1` `/lookup`.
The `/api` part is also dropped in order to preserve consistency across other
endpoints:

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`

A second endpoint is added for clients to request information about the form
the server expects hashes in.

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details`

The following back-and-forth occurs between the client and server.

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

```
alice@example.com
bob@example.com
carl@example.com
+1 234 567 8910
denny@example.com
```

The client will hash each 3PID as a concatenation of the medium and address,

> separated by a space and a pepper appended to the end. Note that phone numbers

Reviewer 10: I think it would be best to call this something other than "pepper", or else clearly define what "pepper" means for the purposes of this MSC.

Most [definitions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pepper_(cryptography)) I can find seem to say a pepper is something that is added to the hash and kept secret. In the MSC though, the pepper value seems to be freely available via the `hash_details` endpoint, so it seems to conflict with how the term is typically used.

> # MSC2134: Identity Hash Lookups

Reviewer 6: I think this is almost there - thank you for the epic. The current draft reads really well.

My only thoughts are that we need to spell out the attacks and tradeoffs and conclusion rationale between the solutions more clearly. I’ve tried to do this in note form at https://gist.github.com/ara4n/8d5fe3030d9fad00111f9ec343e86feb - would it be possible to try to incorporate this?

Meanwhile, I agree that a rotating pepper hash lookups is the best approach here (having reasoned it through).

My only remaining concern is that we should be protecting the IS db better by storing 3pids in hashed form (and thus also 3pid invites and other bindings). ie wherever we currently pass around 3pids instead we pass around a hash salted with a static salt for that IS. i don’t think we even need the raw 3pid for validation purposes, as we can validate using a nonce instead? I’d much rather we spent the time to figure out protecting the db rather than figuring out k-anon further.

Reviewer 2: > My main remaining concerns are that we need to spell out the attacks and tradeoffs and conclusion rationale between the solutions more clearly. I’ve tried to do this in note form at https://gist.github.com/ara4n/8d5fe3030d9fad00111f9ec343e86feb - would it be possible to try to incorporate this?

On it, thanks!

> instead we pass around a hash salted with a static salt for that IS

This is something we could append on to `/hash_details`, or even use the `lookup_pepper` from it for this purpose? Perhaps renaming it to something more generic in the process?

Looking at the IS API docs, the following would need to be changed to enable storing hashed IDs at rest.

* [GET /_matrix/identity/api/v1/lookup](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/unstable#get-matrix-identity-api-v1-lookup) needs to send hashed 3PIDs - this MSC
* [POST /_matrix/identity/api/v1/validate/email/requestToken](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/unstable#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-validate-email-requesttoken) needs a plaintext 3PID to send an email, but while waiting it can store the address hashed.
* [GET /_matrix/identity/api/v1/3pid/getValidated3pid](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/unstable#get-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-getvalidated3pid) needs to be changed to accept hashes instead
* [POST /_matrix/identity/api/v1/3pid/unbind](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/unstable#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-unbind) needs to be changed to accept hashes instead
* [POST /_matrix/identity/api/v1/store-invite](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/unstable#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-store-invite) parameters need to be changed to a hash instead

Endpoints that would already work are:

* [GET/POST /_matrix/identity/api/v1/validate/(email|phone)/submitToken](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/unstable#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-validate-email-submittoken) These endpoints just take token/session information, so no changes are needed.
* [POST /_matrix/identity/api/v1/3pid/bind](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/unstable#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-bind) no changes needed as it just deals with tokens/session ids

There's still the GDPR concern that if we do get compromised, we're obligated to notify everyone that hashes were taken. Either we use matrix as the communication medium (does the law disallow this?) or we send a message to Homeservers who do have the plaintext 3PIDs that they should send an email (this could be horribly abused by an evil IS though).

Reviewer 6: right - thanks for doing the storing hashed ID analysis, this is excellent. i suggest we copy-paste this verbatim as a starting point for a new MSC so as to not block this one further.

I've asked @lampholder whether we can do data breach notifications via Matrix or not.

Reviewer 6: (i've given this the FCP ✅on the assumption that the spelling-out-the-attack and the more concrete tradeoff comparison makes it into the MSC)

Reviewer 6: one other gotcha sprang to mind which we should note: having written out a basic threat model, it becomes clear that a malicious IS could just fail to rotate the pepper (or reuse the same pepper). So the rotating pepper really buys us very little indeed unless clients check for pepper reuse, which seems onerous and also useless given they can’t tell about pepper reuse from before they connected.
So while we might as well keep the ability of the server to specify the pepper it uses for the hashes, in think there is limited use in bothering to rotate it.

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the
implementation, and should return a `403 M_FORBIDDEN` error if so.

If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 400 or 404 is received when
accessing the `v2` endpoint, clients should fallback to the `v1` endpoint
instead. However, clients should be aware that plain-text 3PIDs are required
for the `v1` endpoints, and are strongly encouraged to warn the user of this.

## Tradeoffs

* There is a small cost incurred by performing hashes before requests, but this
  is outweighed by the privacy implications of sending plain-text addresses.

## Security Considerations

Hashes are still reversible with a rainbow table, but the provided pepper,
which can be rotated by identity servers at will, should help mitigate this.
Phone numbers (with their relatively short possible address space of 12
numbers), short email addresses at popular domains, and addresses of both
types that have been leaked in database dumps are more susceptible to hash
reversal.

Mediums and peppers are appended to the address as to prevent a common prefix
for each plain-text string, which prevents attackers from pre-computing bits

> of a stream cipher.

Reviewer 9: Hash functions aren't stream ciphers. I think a more appropriate phrasing would be "pre-computing the internal state of the hash function".

I wonder if there is actually any useful benefit here to appending the medium instead of prepending though, given a pepper is also appended.

Reviewer 2: > Hash functions aren't stream ciphers. I think a more appropriate phrasing would be "pre-computing the internal state of the hash function".

Sounds good, thanks for the clarification.

> I wonder if there is actually any useful benefit here to appending the medium instead of prepending though, given a pepper is also appended.

It doesn't hurt, right?

possible to build a [rainbow
table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rainbow_table), which maps known email
addresses and phone numbers to their hash equivalents. When the identity
server receives a hash, it is then be able to look it up in its rainbow table
and find the corresponding 3PID. To prevent this, one would use a hashing
algorithm such as [bcrypt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bcrypt) with many
rounds, making the construction of a large rainbow table an infeasibly
expensive process. Unfortunately, this is impractical for our use case, as it
would require clients to also perform many, many rounds of hashing, linearly
dependent on the size of their address book, which would likely result in
lower-end mobile phones becoming overwhelmed. We are then forced to use a
fast hashing algorithm, at the cost of making rainbow tables easy to build.

The rainbow table attack is not perfect, because one does need to know email
addresses and phone numbers to build it. While there are only so many
possible phone numbers, and thus it is relatively inexpensive to generate the
hash value for each one, the address space of email addresses is much, much

> wider. If your email address is decently long and is not publicly

Reviewer 3: I've also said this below but length feels misleading for email addresses.

The `/api` part is also dropped in order to preserve consistency across other
endpoints:

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup`

A second endpoint is added for clients to request information about the form
the server expects hashes in.

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details`

The following back-and-forth occurs between the client and server.

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

```
alice@example.com
bob@example.com
carl@example.com
+1 234 567 8910
denny@example.com
```

The client will hash each 3PID as a concatenation of the medium and address,
separated by a space and a pepper appended to the end. Note that phone
numbers should be formatted as defined by
https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pstn-phone-numbers, before being
hashed). Note that "pepper" in this proposal simply refers to a public,
opaque string that is used to produce different hash results between identity
servers. Its value is not secret.

First the client must append the medium to the address:

```
"alice@example.com" -> "alice@example.com email"
"bob@example.com"   -> "bob@example.com email"
"carl@example.com"  -> "carl@example.com email"
"+1 234 567 8910"   -> "12345678910 msisdn"

> "denny@example.com" -> "denny@example.com email"

Reviewer 2: Ideally so, but cryptographically there's more of a chance that you can figure out if a hash is an email or phone number by hashing `email ...` and then checking the beginnings of both hashes.

So putting it behind prevents us from leaking medium data.

> "denny@example.com" -> "denny@example.com email"

Reviewer 2: Great to know, thanks.

```

Hashes must be peppered in order to reduce both the information an identity
server gains during the process, and attacks the client can perform. [0]

In order for clients to know the pepper and hashing algorithm they should use,
identity servers must make the information available on the `/hash_details`
endpoint:

```
GET /_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details

{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithms": ["sha256"]
}
```

The name `lookup_pepper` was chosen in order to account for pepper values

> being returned for other endpoints in the future. The contents of

Reviewer 2: Mm, kind of. It'd be nice to have to make people build different rainbow tables for multiple sets of data, though I do wonder if we'll need hashing for anything other than contact details on an identity server.

> being returned for other endpoints in the future. The contents of

Reviewer 3: Fair enough, yep

`lookup_pepper` MUST match the regular expression `[a-zA-Z0-9]+`, whether
hashing is being performed or not. When no hashing is occuring, a pepper

> value of at least length 1 is still required.

Reviewer 2: It is a bit confusing, and I'm still on the fence about it. The argument for it was that requiring a pepper for every lookup except for "none" would bit a bit confusing to put into the spec, even if it makes logical sense from a design standpoint.

The reason for not always hashing is described here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134/files#diff-307ccba639fd62a74c00c27834c7eca5R137-R144

TL;DR some backends (like LDAP) might not be easy to do hashing with.

> value of at least length 1 is still required.

Reviewer 2: The reason we don't just tell people to stick with v1 is that it's easier on devs to just have one endpoint.

> value of at least length 1 is still required.

Reviewer 3: right, yep - maybe, "A valid pepper value is required even if the server does not offer sha256" might be clearer.

If hashing, the client appends the pepper to the end of the 3PID string.

```
"alice@example.com email" -> "alice@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"bob@example.com email"   -> "bob@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"carl@example.com email"  -> "carl@example.com emailmatrixrocks"
"12345678910 msdisn"      -> "12345678910 msisdnmatrixrocks"

> "denny@example.com email" -> "denny@example.com emailmatrixrocks"

Reviewer 2: Not really, other than that peppers are usually appended.

I might be more inclined to just append everything without spaces, even though it would make the example less legible...

> "denny@example.com email" -> "denny@example.com emailmatrixrocks"

Reviewer 3: Ah ok, although bear in mind that in the LDAP case the IS is going need to parse this string to get the email address to look up, so it will probably want a decent separator for that (and it would be nice if it was consistent-ish between none & sha256).

> "denny@example.com email" -> "denny@example.com emailmatrixrocks"

Reviewer 2: I've separated the pepper with a space now, and moved the medium to the front as @uhoreg stated modern hashing algorithms didn't suffer from the common prefix attack.

4634](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634), identified by the value
`"sha256"` in the `algorithms` array. SHA-256 was chosen as it is currently
used throughout the Matrix spec, as well as its properties of being quick to
hash. While this reduces the resources necessary to generate a rainbow table
for attackers, a fast hash is necessary if particularly slow mobile clients
are going to be hashing thousands of contact details. Other algorithms are
negotiated by the client and server at their discretion.

There are certain situations when an identity server cannot be expected to
compare hashed 3PID values; for example, when a server is connected to a
backend provider such as LDAP, it is not efficient for the identity server to
pull all of the addresses and hash them upon lookup. For this case, can also
support receiving plain-text 3PID addresses from clients. To agree upon this,
the value `"none"` can be added to the `"algorithms"` array of `GET
/hash_details`. The client can then choose to send plain-text values by
setting the `"algorithm"` value in `POST /lookup` to `"none"`.

No hashing will be performed if the client and server decide on `"none"`, and

> 3PIDs will be sent in plain-text, similar to the v1 `/lookup` API. When this

Reviewer 3: is the pepper still appended? (I would vote for it to be the same as the v1 api here, ie. send a tuple of (medium, address))

Reviewer 3: oh, this is covered in the example below. still, might be nice to include it here, and I'd still vote for using the json to encode the two strings separately rather than the IS having to also do string parsing.

Reviewer 3: ah ok, but this allows you to use the same string as they key in the response, ok.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, it makes more sense to append on hashed lookups, but less on plain-text lookups...

occurs, it is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED for the client to prompt the user before
continuing.

When performing a lookup, the pepper and hashing algorithm the client used
must be part of the request body (even when using the `"none"` algorithm
value). If they do not match what the server has on file (which may be the
case if the pepper was changed right after the client's request for it), then
the server must inform the client that they need to query the hash details
again, as opposed to just returning an empty response, which clients would
assume to mean that no contacts are registered on that identity server.

If the algorithm is not supported by the server, the server should return a `400
M_INVALID_PARAM`. If the pepper does not match the server's, the server should
return a new error code, `400 M_INVALID_PEPPER`. A new error code is not

> defined for an invalid algorithm as that is considered a client bug.

Reviewer 3: Mmm, it isn't necessarily. It would be quite valid for a server to, for example, offer 'none' and then stop doing so (granted, if the client requests the hash details before the request then it's a narrow race).

Reviewer 2: The client bug bit came from @turt2live. We could instead just change the wording to say `M_INVALID_PARAM` == bad algo, and `M_INVALID_PEPPER` == bad pepper.

Reviewer 3: Meh, struggling to decide what's best here. A specific error code doesn't cost anything though, but it's not really important so I don't really mind.

Reviewer: It's more likely to be the client's fault. Yes, there is a chance that someone gets hash details then the server restarts for a config change, however an implementation might want to ensure the pepper changes at this point for safety anyways (every restart/config change, append a random number or something).

Reviewer 4: Should we differentiate between an invalid algorithm and invalid hashes? (ie. the client could send sha256, but send hashes that don't fit the sha256 format)

Reviewer 2: > Should we differentiate between an invalid algorithm and invalid hashes? (ie. the client could send `"algorithm": "sha256",` but send hashes that don't fit the sha256 format)

At that point it'll just return no results. We don't want to require servers to understand hashing formats. Simple string comparison should be enough.

> The `M_INVALID_PEPPER` error response contain the correct `algorithm` and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `M_INVALID_PEPPER` error response contains the correct `algorithm` and
```

receiving the response:

```
{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithms": ["none", "sha256"]
}
```

The client decides that it would like to use `"none"`, and thus ignores the
lookup pepper, as no hashing will occur. Appending a space and the 3PID
medium to each address is still necessary:

```
"alice@example.com" -> "alice@example.com email"
"bob@example.com"   -> "bob@example.com email"
"carl@example.com"  -> "carl@example.com email"
"12345678910"       -> "12345678910 msisdn"
"denny@example.com" -> "denny@example.com email"
```

The client then sends these off to the identity server in a `POST` request to
`/lookup`:

```
POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

{
  "addresses": [
    "alice@example.com email",
    "bob@example.com email",
    "carl@example.com email",
    "12345678910 msisdn",
    "denny@example.com email"
  ],
  "algorithm": "none",
  "pepper": "matrixrocks"
}
```

Note that even though we haven't used the `lookup_pepper` value, we still
include the same one sent to us by the identity server in `/hash_details`.
The identity server should still return `400 M_INVALID_PEPPER` if the pepper
is incorrect. This simplifies things and can help ensure the client is

> requesting `/hash_details` properly before each lookup request.

Reviewer 3: Hmm, it adds complexity if a server only cares about support 'none' though.

Reviewer 2: discussion here: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r307399470

```
{
  "mappings": {
    "alice@example.com email": "@alice:example.com",
    "12345678910 msisdn": "@fred:example.com"
  }
}
```

No parameter changes will be made to
[/bind](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/identity_service/r0.2.1#post-matrix-identity-api-v1-3pid-bind)
as part of this proposal.

## Fallback considerations

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the
implementation, and should return a `403 M_FORBIDDEN` error if so.

If an identity server is too old and a HTTP 400 or 404 is received when
accessing the `v2` endpoint, clients should fallback to the `v1` endpoint
instead. However, clients should be aware that plain-text 3PIDs are required
for the `v1` endpoints, and are strongly encouraged to warn the user of this.

## Tradeoffs

* There is a small cost incurred by performing hashes before requests, but this
  is outweighed by the privacy implications of sending plain-text addresses.

## Security Considerations

Hashes are still reversible with a rainbow table, but the provided pepper,
which can be rotated by identity servers at will, should help mitigate this.
Phone numbers (with their relatively short possible address space of 12

> numbers), short email addresses, and addresses of both type that have been

Reviewer 3: Length for email addresses feels slightly misleading: it's more whether an attacker would include them in the table. If I were making one, for example, I'd start with anything at gmail.com.

leaked in database dumps are more susceptible to hash reversal.

Mediums and peppers are appended to the address as to prevent a common prefix
for each plain-text string, which prevents attackers from pre-computing bits

> of a stream cipher.

Reviewer 3: This bit still doesn't really make any sense: we've defined sha256 which doesn't work that way, and even if we, for some reason, added an algorithm later that did suffer from this, this would be a poor mitigation since `steve.smith@example.com` and `steve.jones@example.com` would still share a prefix.

Reviewer 2: @uhoreg I think was the one to suggest it initially?

Reviewer 8: Yes, the idea is that if the pepper is prepended, then an attacker can just pre-hash the pepper and store the initial state of the hash, and then finish off computing the hash of the addresses.  This way, to compute a rainbow table, they just need to do the hashing work for the pepper once, and then each of the addresses.  By putting the pepper at the end, they need to do the hashing work for the pepper once for each address that they hash.

Practically speaking, it might not make a lot of difference (especially for the medium, which short relative to the address), but it fairly traditional to put the salt/pepper at the end.

Separately, calling it a "stream cipher" is probably not the best.  Perhaps, say that it "prevents attacker from pre-computing the hash state for the pepper".

Reviewer 2: Oh, I've just moved mediums to the front. I suppose I should move them to the middle to make hashing take longer for an attacker then?

Reviewer 2: I've moved the medium back behind the address.

possible to build a [rainbow
table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rainbow_table), which maps known email
addresses and phone numbers to their hash equivalents. When the identity
server receives a hash, it is then be able to look it up in its rainbow table
and find the corresponding 3PID. To prevent this, one would use a hashing
algorithm such as [bcrypt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bcrypt) with many
rounds, making the construction of a large rainbow table an infeasibly
expensive process. Unfortunately, this is impractical for our use case, as it
would require clients to also perform many, many rounds of hashing, linearly
dependent on the size of their address book, which would likely result in
lower-end mobile phones becoming overwhelmed. We are then forced to use a
fast hashing algorithm, at the cost of making rainbow tables easy to build.

The rainbow table attack is not perfect, because one does need to know email
addresses and phone numbers to build it. While there are only so many
possible phone numbers, and thus it is relatively inexpensive to generate the
hash value for each one, the address space of email addresses is much, much

> wider. If your email address is not share a common mailserver, decently long

Reviewer 2: er, uh, english, yes

case, `70b1b5637937` are the leading characters of "alice@example.com" and
"denny@example.com", while `21375b3f1b61` are the leading characters of
"+12345678910" and `70b1b1b28dcf` does not match any of the hashes the client
has locally, so it is ignored. "bob@example.com" and "carl@example.com" do not
seem to have Matrix IDs associated with them.

Finally, the client salts and hashes 3PID hashes that it believes are
associated with Matrix IDs and sends them to the identity server on the
`/lookup_hashes` endpoint. Instead of hashing the 3PIDs again, clients should
reuse the peppered hash that was previously sent to the server. Salting is
performed to prevent an identity server generating a rainbow table to reverse
any non-Matrix 3PIDs that slipped in. Salts MUST match the regular expression
`[a-zA-Z0-9]*`.

    Computed previously:

    "email alice@example.commatrixrocks"
    becomes
    "70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4"

    The client should generate a salt. Let's say it generates "salt123". This
    value is appended to the hash.

    "70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4"
    becomes

>     "70b1b5637937ab99f6aad01f694b3665541a5b9cbdfe54880462b3f1ad35d1f4salt123"

Reviewer 9: To clarify: is the base64 encoded hash being salted here? Any reason to not operate on the raw bytes?

Reviewer 2: Good catch. It's probably better to.

Reviewer 9: Thinking about this a bit more, it might make caching a bit easier if we operate on the encoded hash? Regardless, this needs to be clarified.

Reviewer 2: Have clarified, thanks.

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/lookup_hashes`

A third endpoint is added for clients to request information about the form
the server expects hashes in.

- `/_matrix/identity/v2/hash_details`

The following back-and-forth occurs between the client and server.

Let's say the client wants to check the following 3PIDs:

    alice@example.com
    bob@example.com
    carl@example.com
    +1 234 567 8910
    denny@example.com

The client will hash each 3PID as a concatenation of the medium and address,
separated by a space and a pepper appended to the end. Note that phone numbers
should be formatted as defined by
https://matrix.org/docs/spec/appendices#pstn-phone-numbers, before being
hashed). First the client must prepend the medium to the address:

     "alice@example.com" -> "email alice@example.com"
     "bob@example.com"   -> "email bob@example.com"  
     "carl@example.com"  -> "email carl@example.com" 
     "+1 234 567 8910"   -> "msisdn 12345678910"     
     "denny@example.com" -> "email denny@example.com"

Hashes must be peppered in order to reduce both the information a client gains
during the process, and attacks the identity server can perform (namely sending

> a rainbow table of hashes back in the response to `/lookup`).

Reviewer 7: How does a `pepper` stop a rainbow table?

Reviewer 4: It stops a generic rainbow table, and forces the attacker to create an IS-server-specific table. It's not much of a barrier, but it at least requires some matrix-specific work.

that the 3pid is identifiable to anyone who can see the payload (e.g. willh@matrix.org
can be identified).

The problem with this, is that a malicious identity service could then store the plaintext
3pid and make an assumption that the requesting entity knows the holder of the 3pid, even
if the identity service does not know of the 3pid beforehand.

If the 3pid is hashed, the identity service could not determine the owner of the 3pid
unless the identity service has already been made aware of the 3pid by the owner
themselves (using the /bind mechanism).

Note that this proposal does not stop a identity service from mapping hashed 3pids to many
users, in an attempt to form a social graph. However the identity of the 3pid will remain
a mystery until /bind is used.

It should be clear that there is a need to hide any address from the identity service that
has not been explicitly bound to it, and this proposal aims to solve that for the lookup API.

## Proposal

This proposal suggests making changes to the Identity Service API's lookup endpoints. Due
to the nature of this proposal, the new endpoints should be on a `v2` path:

> - `/_matrix/identity/api/v2/lookup`

Reviewer 6: hm, is this the right prefix? shouldn’t it be an r-something? it might be easier to use the same prefix but different api path perhaps

Author: Current release uses v, but I would have expected r too.

Reviewer 6: we also need to check the cap neg exists to let clients know they can use the new api

Reviewer: Bit of background on endpoint versions: only the CS API uses `rX` for endpoints, which we ultimately decided was probably a mistake in ~Aug 2018. The `vX` series on all other specs means we can more easily bump the version of individual endpoints without ratcheting the whole spec forward, as `rX` is based on the spec's version. We should definitely drop the ugly `/api` part of this endpoint though now that we have the opportunity - the IS spec is the only one which has this, making it the odd one out.

Re: caps checking. Can we not just do what the federation v2 invite does? Try the v2 endpoint and if you get a unsuccessful error (404, 501, etc) then try the v1 endpoint.

- `/_matrix/identity/api/v2/bulk_lookup`

The parameters will remain the same, but `address` should no longer be in a plain-text

> format. `address` will now take a SHA-256 format hash value, and the resulting digest should

Reviewer 2: Why not a truncated hash for extra security + smaller network load?

Reviewer 2: I would do this, but I'm not sure what's safe to truncate by...

be encoded in base64 format. For example:

```python
address = "willh@matrix.org"

> digest = hashlib.sha256(address.encode()).digest()

Reviewer 6: this should prolly be {H(email + salt), salt} to make rainbow table attacks slightly harder

Reviewer 6: (although salt would have to be constant for everyone, so it doesn’t buy much)

Author: Would this require us to do a negotiation step where the server sends it's unique salt, and then hash it using that salt? Bit more involved but would ensure uniqueness?

Reviewer 6: the question is how bound 3pids are stored. if they are stored as hashes, then we have no choice but have a predictable salt in the hash, which doesn’t achieve much other than stop arbitrary pregenerated hash tables of mail addresses from working. instead, you’d have to pregenerate H(email + “foo”) tables specifically for matrix, where foo us defined in this MSC.. We can’t use server_name as when you’re doing a lookup you don’t know any server_names for the target.

if we store the 3pids as plain text equivalent in the IS, then the salt could be random per lookup, as the server can calculate its own hashes to compare against the uploaded ones. however, this would be pretty inefficient, plus we probably don’t want to be storing unhashed 3pids.

Reviewer: Specifying a salt in the spec does at least drive away lazy attackers who want to quickly use their existing tables. It's a bit of a weak argument, but if we can force people to do even a little bit of Matrix-specific logic to exploit a vulnerability then we are in a slightly safer position.

We can also specify a SHOULD for servers to hash and salt the hashes of 3PIDs when persisting them, making rainbow tables much harder to use at the persistence level. It does a look a bit dirty (`sha256(sha256(3pid), salt)`), but it might be enough to ward off attacks on the persisted values.

result_address = base64.encodebytes(digest).decode()
print(result_address)
CpvOgBf0hFzdqZD4ASvWW0DAefErRRX5y8IegMBO98w=
```

### Example request

> 

Reviewer 6: need to handle hash agility for when sha-256 gets broken

SHA-256 has been chosen as it is [currently used elsewhere](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.2#adding-hashes-and-signatures-to-outgoing-events) in the Matrix protocol, and the only

> requirement for the hashing algorithm is that it cannot be used to guess the real value of the address

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
requirement for the hashing algorithm is that it cannot be used to guess the real value of the address.
```

No parameter changes will be made to /bind, but identity services should keep a hashed value
for each address it knows about in order to process lookups quicker and it is the recommendation
that this is done at the time of bind.

`v1` versions of these endpoints may be disabled at the discretion of the implementation, and
should return a `M_FORBIDDEN` `errcode` if so.

> ## Tradeoffs

Reviewer 6: we should link (and read) https://signal.org/blog/contact-discovery/ somewhere

Reviewer 11: ...which actually mentions the approach of this MSC on the top of the non-working list.

Author: Hmm. Indeed..

Reviewer 2: And this? https://signal.org/blog/private-contact-discovery/

* This approach means that the client now needs to calculate a hash by itself, but the belief
  is that most languages provide a mechanism for doing so.
* There is a small cost incurred by doing hashes before requests, but this is outweighed by
  the privacy implications of sending plaintext addresses.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 2: I would also mention that this isn't an end-all be-all solution, but good enough with minimal effort.

This proposal does not force a identity service to stop handling plaintext requests, because
a large amount of the matrix ecosystem relies upon this behavior. However, a conscious effort
should be made by all users to use the privacy respecting endpoints outlined above. Identity

> services may disallow use of the v1 endpoint.

Reviewer: should spec an error code for this for absolute clarity (probably 403 M_FORBIDDEN)

> Base64 has been chosen to encode the value due to it's ubiquitous support in many languages,

Reviewer: We already require unpadded base64 in the encryption module for clients, and I think we should use that here too. At least for the sake of consistency in the spec.

Would also mean we can put a giant banner on the spec saying "all base64 is unpadded base64" without "except for..."

however it does mean that special characters in the address will have to be encoded when used
as a parameter value.

## Security considerations

> None

Reviewer: this is where that signal article should be mentioned

Reviewer 2: I put it in a new `Other considered solutions` title instead. I feel like we should just removed the `Security considerations` section as it's a bit redundant, seeing as this whole thing is about security/privacy.

## Conclusion

> This proposal outlines a quick and effective method to stop bulk collection of users contact

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal outlines a quick and effective method to stop bulk collection of user's contact
```

[Issue #2130](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2130) has been
created in response to a security issue brought up by an independent party.
To summarise the issue, when a user wants to ask an identity server which of
its contacts have registered a Matrix account, it performs a lookup against
an identity server. The client currently sends all of its contact details in
the form of plain-text addresses, meaning that the identity server can
identify and record every third-party ID (3PID) of the user's contacts. This

> allows the identity server is able to collect email addresses and phone

Reviewer: english

speaking.

Identity servers can specify their own peppers, which can be handy if a rainbow table is released for their current one. Identity servers could also set a timer for rotating this value to further impede rainbow table publishing. As such, it must be possible for clients to be able to query what pepper an identity server requires before sending it hashes. Thus a new endpoint must be added:

```
GET /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup_pepper
```

This endpoint takes no parameters, and simply returns the current pepper as a JSON object:

```
{
  "pepper": "matrixrocks"
}
```

In addition, the pepper the client used must be appended as a parameter to the
new `/lookup` and `/bulk_lookup` endpoints, ensuring that the client is using
the right one. If it does not match what the server has on file (which may be
the case is it rotated right after the client's request for it), then client
will know to query the pepper again instead of just getting a response saying
no contacts are registered on that identity server.

Thus, a call to `/bulk_lookup` would look like the following:

```
{
  "threepids": [
    [
      "email",

>       "user@example.org"

Reviewer 4: Wouldn't this look like:

```
{
  "threepids": [
    [
        "email",
        "CpvOgBf0hFzdqZD4ASvWW0DAefErRRX5y8IegMBO98w"
    ],
}
```

```
The client should append the pepper to the end of the 3PID string before
hashing.

"email alice@example.com" -> "email alice@example.commatrixrocks"
"email bob@example.com"   -> "email bob@example.commatrixrocks"  
"email carl@example.com"  -> "email carl@example.commatrixrocks" 
"msisdn 12345678910"      -> "msisdn 12345678910matrixrocks"     
"email denny@example.com" -> "email denny@example.commatrixrocks"
```

Clients SHOULD request this endpoint each time before performing a lookup, to
handle identity servers which may rotate their pepper values frequently.
Clients MUST choose one of the given hash algorithms to encrypt the 3PID during
lookup.

At a minimum, clients and identity servers MUST support SHA-256 as defined by
[RFC 4634](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4634), identified by the
`algorithm` value `"sha256"`. SHA-256 was chosen as it is currently used
throughout the Matrix spec, as well as its properties of being quick to hash.
While this reduces the resources necessary to generate a rainbow table for
attackers, a fast hash is necessary if particularly slow mobile clients are
going to be hashing thousands of contact details. Other algorithms can be

> negotiated by the client and server at their discretion.

Reviewer: I realize my comments are getting extremely nitpicky, but: it's not at their discretion. I'd just take off the last 3 words of the sentence and leave it at that.

```

This endpoint takes no parameters, and simply returns supported hash algorithms

> and peppers as a JSON object:

Reviewer: if this is meant to be plural, it's not in the object.

Reviewer 2: It may be in the future, but I agree that it shouldn't be now.

`"sha256"` in the `algorithms` array. SHA-256 was chosen as it is currently
used throughout the Matrix spec, as well as its properties of being quick to
hash. While this reduces the resources necessary to generate a rainbow table
for attackers, a fast hash is necessary if particularly slow mobile clients
are going to be hashing thousands of contact details. Other algorithms are
negotiated by the client and server at their discretion.

There are certain situations when an identity server cannot be expected to
compare hashed 3PID values; for example, when a server is connected to a
backend provider such as LDAP, there is no way for the identity server to
efficiently pull all of the addresses and hash them. For this case, clients
and server MUST also support sending plain-text 3PID values. To agree upon
this, the `"algorithms"` field of `GET /hash_details` MUST contain the value
`"none"`, and `lookup_pepper` will be an empty string. For this case, the
identity server could only send `"none"` as part of the `"algorithms"` array.
The client can then decide whether it wants to accept this. The identity
server could also send `["none", "sha256"]` and cease from looking up

> contacts in LDAP unless `"none"` is decided upon.

Reviewer: the bit starting with "and cease from..." is more of an implementation decision: if an IS wants to waste its time and send hashes into LDAP to get zero results, that's its problem.

performed, and `lookup_pepper` is an empty string, clients MUST cease the
lookup operation.

> If hashing, the client should append the pepper to the end of the 3PID string.

Reviewer: remove "should" and just make it "the client appends the pepper"

going to be hashing thousands of contact details. Other algorithms can be
negotiated by the client and server at their discretion.

There are certain situations when an identity server cannot be expected to
compare hashed 3PID values; When a server is connected to a backend provider
such as LDAP, there is no way for the identity server to efficiently pull all
of the addresses and hash them. For this case, the `algorithm` field of `GET

> /hash_details` may be set to `"none"`, and `lookup_pepper` will be an empty

Reviewer: This would be a good time to namespace non-standard algorithms as `m.none`.

Additionally, only storing 3pid hashes at rest instead of the plain-text
versions is impractical if the hashing algorithm ever needs to be changed.

Bloom filters are an alternative method of providing private contact discovery,
however does not scale well due to clients needing to download a large filter
that needs updating every time a new bind is made. Further considered solutions
are explored in https://signal.org/blog/contact-discovery/ Signal's eventual
solution of using SGX is considered impractical for a Matrix-style setup.

Bit out of scope for this MSC, but there was an argument for not keeping all
IDs as hashed on disk in the identity server, that being if a hashing algorithm
was broken, we couldn't update the hashing algorithm without having the

> plaintext 3PIDs. Well @toml helpfully said that we could just take the old

Reviewer 4: I have a hard time parsing this sentence. I think the meaning is supposed to be: "there was an argument for removing all plaintext 3pids and only keep the hashes on disk. Even if the hash algorithm was broken, another round of hashing could be added (resulting in SHA256+SomeBetterAlg) resulting in a safe hash without requirering the plaintext 3pid."
Is that correct?

Because careful reading of it seemed to suggest that there was an argument for "not keeping the hashed 3pid on disk".

Reviewer 2: Yes that is correct. Will reword, thanks.

```
NOTE: Hashes are not real values

> "alice@example.com email matrixrocks" -> "y_TvXLKxFT9CURPXI1wvfjvfvsXe8FPgYj-mkQrnszs"

Reviewer: it would be good to make sure the example hashes throughout the proposal are still accurate.

Reviewer 2: The doc now has real hashes in it.

numbers), short email addresses, and addresses of both type that have been
leaked in database dumps are more susceptible to hash reversal.

Mediums and peppers are appended to the address as to prevent a common prefix

> for each plain-text string, which prevents attackers from pre-computing bits

Reviewer: This still poses a problem: now attackers can determine the approximate length of 3pid because patterns are really easy to find in strings (the pepper/type being in the middle/end helps figure out where the boundary is).

Reviewer 8: I don't see how an attacker can determine the length of the 3pid, given the hash

The client would first make `GET` a request to `/hash_details`, perhaps
receiving the response:

```
{
  "lookup_pepper": "matrixrocks",
  "algorithms": ["none", "sha256"]
}
```

The client decides that it would like to use `"none"`, and thus ignores the
lookup pepper, as no hashing will occur. Appending a space and the 3PID
medium to each address is still necessary:

```
"alice@example.com" -> "alice@example.com email"
"bob@example.com"   -> "bob@example.com email"
"carl@example.com"  -> "carl@example.com email"
"12345678910"       -> "12345678910 msisdn"
"denny@example.com" -> "denny@example.com email"
```

The client then sends these off to the identity server in a `POST` request to
`/lookup`:

```
POST /_matrix/identity/v2/lookup

{
  "addresses": [
    "alice@example.com email",
    "bob@example.com email",
    "carl@example.com email",
    "12345678910 msisdn",
    "denny@example.com email"
  ],
  "algorithm": "none",
  "pepper": "matrixrocks"
}
```

Note that even though we haven't used the `lookup_pepper` value, we still
include the same one sent to us by the identity server in `/hash_details`.
The identity server should still return `400 M_INVALID_PEPPER` if the pepper

> is incorrect. This is intended to make implementation simpler.

Reviewer 2: I'm not entirely sure about this. It would save bites to remove `pepper` from the request here, as it's not necessary, but it would require the identity server to special-case the `none` algorithm, and would change the `pepper` value to be optional, but required for every algorithm besides "none". Maybe that's fine though?

Reviewer: I'm not convinced it would make the implementation simpler either. It serves more as a point-in-time token that the IS can use to ensure that the client is actually checking for an updated pepper though, and that seems worthwhile I think.

Bloom filters are an alternative method of providing private contact discovery.
However, they do not scale well due to requiring clients to download a large
filter that needs updating every time a new bind is made.

Further considered solutions are explored in
https://signal.org/blog/contact-discovery/. Signal's eventual solution of
using Software Guard Extensions (detailed in
https://signal.org/blog/private-contact-discovery/) is considered impractical
for a federated network, as it requires specialized hardware.

k-anonymity was considered as an alternative approach, in which the identity
server would never receive a full hash of a 3PID that it did not already know
about. Discussion and a walk-through of what a client/identity-server
interaction would look like are documented [in this Github
comment](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2134#discussion_r298691748).

While this solution seems like a win for privacy, its actual benefits are a

> lot more naunced. Let's explore them by performing threat-model analysis:

Reviewer 6: s/naunced/nuanced/
s/threat-model/a threat-model/

We consider three attackers:

 1. A malicious third party trying to discover the identity server mappings
    in the homeserver.

    The malicious third party scenario can only be protected against by rate
    limiting lookups, given otherwise it looks identical to legitimate traffic.

 1. An attacker who has stolen an IS db
 
    In theory the 3PIDs could be stored hashed with a static salt to protect
    a stolen DB. This has been descoped from this MSC, and is largely an

>     orthogonal problem.

Reviewer 6: can we link to a proto-MSC with your notes on the problem here, to make it crystal clear that we're considering it in future, and haven't designed it out of this MSC, but descoped from here?

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2211

no matter what algorithm is used.

For k-anon this would put the most computational onus on the server (as it
would effectively be creating a partial rainbow table for every lookup), but
this is probably not infeasible - so we've gone and added a lot of complexity
and computational cost for not much benefit, given the system can still be
trivially attacked.

Finally, as more and more users come onto Matrix, their contact lists will
get more and more exposed anyway given the IS server has to be able to
identity Matrix-enabled 3PIDs to perform the lookup.

Thus the conclusion is that while k-anon is harder to attack, it's unclear
that this is actually enough of an obstacle to meaningfully stop a malicious
IS. Therefore we should KISS and go for a simple hash lookup with a rotating
pepper (which is not much harder than a static pepper, especially if our
initial implementation doesn't bother rotating the pepper). Rather than trying
to make the k-anon approach work, we'd be better off spending that time
figuring out how to store 3pids as hashes in the DB (and in 3pid bindings
etc), or how to decentralise ISes in general.

> 

Reviewer 6: "It's also worth noting that a malicious server may fail to rotate the pepper, making the rotation logic of questionable benefit"
